[]

[12915.jpg]

Published in the UK in 2011

by Icon Books Ltd, Omnibus Business Centre,

39–41 North Road, London N7 9DP

email: info@iconbooks.co.uk

www.iconbooks.co.uk

This electronic edition published in the UK in 2011 by Icon Books Ltd

ISBN: 978-1-84831-315-6 (ePub format)

ISBN: 978-1-84831-316-3 (Adobe ebook format)

Printed edition (ISBN 978-184831-292-0)

sold in the UK, Europe, South Africa and Asia

by Faber & Faber Ltd, Bloomsbury House,

74–77 Great Russell Street, London WC1B 3DA

or their agents

Printed edition distributed in the UK, Europe, South Africa and Asia

by TBS Ltd, TBS Distribution Centre, Colchester Road,

Frating Green, Colchester CO7 7DW

Printed edition published in Australia in 2011 by Allen & Unwin Pty Ltd,

PO Box 8500, 83 Alexander Street,

Crows Nest, NSW 2065

Text copyright © 2011 Nessa Carey

The author has asserted her moral rights.

No part of this book may be reproduced in any form, or by any means,
without prior permission in writing from the publisher.

Typeset by Marie Doherty

For Abi Reynolds, who reprogrammed my life

And in memory of Sean Carey, 1925 to 2011

  Contents

 

Cover

Title page

Copyright

Dedication

Acknowledgements

Introduction

Notes on nomenclature

Chapter 1: An Ugly Toad and an Elegant Man

Chapter 2: How We Learned to Roll Uphill

Chapter 3: Life As We Knew It

Chapter 4: Life As We Know It Now

Chapter 5: Why Aren’t Identical Twins Actually Identical?

Chapter 6: The Sins of the Fathers

Chapter 7: The Generations Game

Chapter 8: The Battle of the Sexes

Chapter 9: Generation X

Chapter 10: The Message is Not the Medium

Chapter 11: Fighting the Enemy Within

Chapter 12: All in the Mind

Chapter 13: The Downhill Slope

Chapter 14: Long Live the Queen

Chapter 15: The Green Revolution

Chapter 16: The Ways Ahead

Notes

Glossary

  Acknowledgements

 

Over the last few years I’ve had the privilege of working with some
truly amazing scientists. There are too many to name here but special
acknowledgements must go to Michelle Barton, Stephan Beck, Mark Bedford,
Shelley Berger, Adrian Bird, Chris Boshoff, Sharon Dent, Didier Devys,
Luciano Di Croce, Anne Ferguson-Smith, Jean-Pierre Issa, Peter Jones,
Bob Kingston, Tony Kouzarides, Peter Laird, Jeannie Lee, Danesh Moazed,
Steve McMahon, Wolf Reik, Ramin Shiekhattar, Irina Stancheva, Azim
Surani, Laszlo Tora, Bryan Turner and Patrick Varga-Weisz.

Thanks go also to my former colleagues at CellCentric – Jonathan Best,
Devanand Crease, Tim Fell, David Knowles, Neil Pegg, Thea Stanway and
Will West.

As a first-time author I owe major gratitude to my agent, Andrew Lownie,
for taking a risk on me and on this book.

Major thanks also to the lovely people at my publishers Icon, especially
Simon Flynn, Najma Finlay, Andrew Furlow, Nick Halliday and Harry
Scoble. Their unfailing patience with my complete ignorance of all
aspects of publishing has been heroic.

I’ve had great support from family and friends and I hope they’ll
forgive me for not mentioning them all by name. But for sheer
entertainment and distraction during some stressy patches I have to
thank Eleanor Flowerday, Willem Flowerday, Alex Gibbs, Ella Gibbs,
Jessica Shayle O’Toole, Lili Sutton and Luke Sutton.

And for always resisting the temptation to roll her eyes every time I
said, ‘I can’t meet friends/do the dishes/go away for the weekend
because I’m working on my book’, I’ve got to thank my lovely partner Abi
Reynolds. I promise I’ll take that ballroom dancing lesson now.

  Introduction

 

  Introduction

 

DNA.

Sometimes, when we read about biology, we could be forgiven for thinking
that those three letters explain everything. Here, for example, are just
a few of the statements made on 26 June 2000, when researchers announced
that the human genome had been sequenced1:

  Today we are learning the language in which God created life.

  US President Bill Clinton

  We now have the possibility of achieving all we ever hoped for from
  medicine.

  UK Science Minister Lord Sainsbury

  Mapping the human genome has been compared with putting a man on the
  moon, but I believe it is more than that. This is the outstanding
  achievement not only of our lifetime, but in terms of human history.

  Michael Dexter, The Wellcome Trust

From these quotations, and many others like them, we might well think
that researchers could have relaxed a bit after June 2000 because most
human health and disease problems could now be sorted out really easily.
After all, we had the blueprint for humankind. All we needed to do was
get a bit better at understanding this set of instructions, so we could
fill in a few details.

Unfortunately, these statements have proved at best premature. The
reality is rather different.

We talk about DNA as if it’s a template, like a mould for a car part in
a factory. In the factory, molten metal or plastic gets poured into the
mould thousands of times and, unless something goes wrong in the
process, out pop thousands of identical car parts.

But DNA isn’t really like that. It’s more like a script. Think of Romeo
and Juliet, for example. In 1936 George Cukor directed Leslie Howard and
Norma Shearer in a film version. Sixty years later Baz Luhrmann directed
Leonardo DiCaprio and Claire Danes in another movie version of this
play. Both productions used Shakespeare’s script, yet the two movies are
entirely different. Identical starting points, different outcomes.

That’s what happens when cells read the genetic code that’s in DNA. The
same script can result in different productions. The implications of
this for human health are very wide-ranging, as we will see from the
case studies we are going to look at in a moment. In all these case
studies it’s really important to remember that nothing happened to the
DNA blueprint of the people in these case studies. Their DNA didn’t
change (mutate), and yet their life histories altered irrevocably in
response to their environments.

Audrey Hepburn was one of the 20th century’s greatest movie stars.
Stylish, elegant and with a delicately lovely, almost fragile bone
structure, her role as Holly Golightly in Breakfast at Tiffany’s has
made her an icon, even to those who have never seen the movie. It’s
startling to think that this wonderful beauty was created by terrible
hardship. Audrey Hepburn was a survivor of an event in the Second World
War known as the Dutch Hunger Winter. This ended when she was sixteen
years old but the after-effects of this period, including poor physical
health, stayed with her for the rest of her life.

The Dutch Hunger Winter lasted from the start of November 1944 to the
late spring of 1945. This was a bitterly cold period in Western Europe,
creating further hardship in a continent that had been devastated by
four years of brutal war. Nowhere was this worse than in the Western
Netherlands, which at this stage was still under German control. A
German blockade resulted in a catastrophic drop in the availability of
food to the Dutch population. At one point the population was trying to
survive on only about 30 per cent of the normal daily calorie intake.
People ate grass and tulip bulbs, and burned every scrap of furniture
they could get their hands on, in a desperate effort to stay alive. Over
20,000 people had died by the time food supplies were restored in May
1945.

The dreadful privations of this time also created a remarkable
scientific study population. The Dutch survivors were a well-defined
group of individuals all of whom suffered just one period of
malnutrition, all of them at exactly the same time. Because of the
excellent healthcare infrastructure and record-keeping in the
Netherlands, epidemiologists have been able to follow the long-term
effects of the famine. Their findings were completely unexpected.

One of the first aspects they studied was the effect of the famine on
the birth weights of children who had been in the womb during that
terrible period. If a mother was well-fed around the time of conception
and malnourished only for the last few months of the pregnancy, her baby
was likely to be born small. If, on the other hand, the mother suffered
malnutrition for the first three months of the pregnancy only (because
the baby was conceived towards the end of this terrible episode), but
then was well-fed, she was likely to have a baby with a normal body
weight. The foetus ‘caught up’ in body weight.

That all seems quite straightforward, as we are all used to the idea
that foetuses do most of their growing in the last few months of
pregnancy. But epidemiologists were able to study these groups of babies
for decades and what they found was really surprising. The babies who
were born small stayed small all their lives, with lower obesity rates
than the general population. For forty or more years, these people had
access to as much food as they wanted, and yet their bodies never got
over the early period of malnutrition. Why not? How did these early life
experiences affect these individuals for decades? Why weren’t these
people able to go back to normal, once their environment reverted to how
it should be?

Even more unexpectedly, the children whose mothers had been malnourished
only early in pregnancy, had higher obesity rates than normal. Recent
reports have shown a greater incidence of other health problems as well,
including certain tests of mental activity. Even though these
individuals had seemed perfectly healthy at birth, something had
happened to their development in the womb that affected them for decades
after. And it wasn’t just the fact that something had happened that
mattered, it was when it happened. Events that take place in the first
three months of development, a stage when the foetus is really very
small, can affect an individual for the rest of their life.

Even more extraordinarily, some of these effects seem to be present in
the children of this group, i.e. in the grandchildren of the women who
were malnourished during the first three months of their pregnancy. So
something that happened in one pregnant population affected their
children’s children. This raised the really puzzling question of how
these effects were passed on to subsequent generations.

Let’s consider a different human story. Schizophrenia is a dreadful
mental illness which, if untreated, can completely overwhelm and disable
an affected person. Patients may present with a range of symptoms
including delusions, hallucinations and enormous difficulties focusing
mentally. People with schizophrenia may become completely incapable of
distinguishing between the ‘real world’ and their own hallucinatory and
delusional realm. Normal cognitive, emotional and societal responses are
lost. There is a terrible misconception that people with schizophrenia
are likely to be violent and dangerous. For the majority of patients
this isn’t the case at all, and the people most likely to suffer harm
because of this illness are the patients themselves. Individuals with
schizophrenia are fifty times more likely to attempt suicide than
healthy individuals2.

Schizophrenia is a tragically common condition. It affects between 0.5
per cent and 1 per cent of the population in most countries and
cultures, which means that there may be over fifty million people alive
today who are suffering from this condition. Scientists have known for
some time that genetics plays a strong role in determining if a person
will develop this illness. We know this because if one of a pair of
identical twins has schizophrenia, there is a 50 per cent chance that
their twin will also have the condition. This is much higher than the 1
per cent risk in the general population.

Identical twins have exactly the same genetic code as each other. They
share the same womb and usually they are brought up in very similar
environments. When we consider this, it doesn’t seem surprising that if
one of the twins develops schizophrenia, the chance that his or her twin
will also develop the illness is very high. In fact, we have to start
wondering why it isn’t higher. Why isn’t the figure 100 per cent? How is
it that two apparently identical individuals can become so very
different? An individual has a devastating mental illness but will their
identical twin suffer from it too? Flip a coin – heads they win, tails
they lose. Variations in the environment are unlikely to account for
this, and even if they did, how would these environmental effects have
such profoundly different impacts on two genetically identical people?

Here’s a third case study. A small child, less than three years old, is
abused and neglected by his or her parents. Eventually, the state
intervenes and the child is taken away from the biological parents and
placed with foster or adoptive parents. These new carers love and
cherish the child, doing everything they can to create a secure home,
full of affection. The child stays with these new parents throughout the
rest of its childhood and adolescence, and into young adulthood.

Sometimes everything works out well for this person. They grow up into a
happy, stable individual indistinguishable from all their peers who had
normal, non-abusive childhoods. But often, tragically, it doesn’t work
out this way. Children who have suffered from abuse or neglect in their
early years grow up with a substantially higher risk of adult mental
health problems than the general population. All too often the child
grows up into an adult at high risk of depression, self-harm, drug abuse
and suicide.

Once again, we have to ask ourselves why. Why is it so difficult to
override the effects of early childhood exposure to neglect or abuse?
Why should something that happened early in life have effects on mental
health that may still be obvious decades later? In some cases, the adult
may have absolutely no recollection of the traumatic events, and yet
they may suffer the consequences mentally and emotionally for the rest
of their lives.

These three case studies seem very different on the surface. The first
is mainly about nutrition, especially of the unborn child. The second is
about the differences that arise between genetically identical
individuals. The third is about long-term psychological damage as a
result of childhood abuse.

But these stories are linked at a very fundamental biological level.
They are all examples of epigenetics. Epigenetics is the new discipline
that is revolutionising biology. Whenever two genetically identical
individuals are non-identical in some way we can measure, this is called
epigenetics. When a change in environment has biological consequences
that last long after the event itself has vanished into distant memory,
we are seeing an epigenetic effect in action.

Epigenetic phenomena can be seen all around us, every day. Scientists
have identified many examples of epigenetics, just like the ones
described above, for many years. When scientists talk about epigenetics
they are referring to all the cases where the genetic code alone isn’t
enough to describe what’s happening – there must be something else going
on as well.

This is one of the ways that epigenetics is described scientifically,
where things which are genetically identical can actually appear quite
different to one another. But there has to be a mechanism that brings
out this mismatch between the genetic script and the final outcome.
These epigenetic effects must be caused by some sort of physical change,
some alterations in the vast array of molecules that make up the cells
of every living organism. This leads us to the other way of viewing
epigenetics – the molecular description. In this model, epigenetics can
be defined as the set of modifications to our genetic material that
change the ways genes are switched on or off, but which don’t alter the
genes themselves.

Although it may seem confusing that the word ‘epigenetics’ can have two
different meanings, it’s just because we are describing the same event
at two different levels. It’s a bit like looking at the pictures in old
newspapers with a magnifying glass, and seeing that they are made up of
dots. If we didn’t have a magnifying glass we might have thought that
each picture was just made in one solid piece and we’d probably never
have been able to work out how so many new images could be created each
day. On the other hand, if all we ever did was look through the
magnifying glass, all we would see would be dots, and we’d never see the
incredible image that they formed together and which we’d see if we
could only step back and look at the big picture.

The revolution that has happened very recently in biology is that for
the first time we are actually starting to understand how amazing
epigenetic phenomena are caused. We’re no longer just seeing the large
image, we can now also analyse the individual dots that created it.
Crucially, this means that we are finally starting to unravel the
missing link between nature and nurture; how our environment talks to us
and alters us, sometimes forever.

The ‘epi’ in epigenetics is derived from Greek and means at, on, to,
upon, over or beside. The DNA in our cells is not some pure,
unadulterated molecule. Small chemical groups can be added at specific
regions of DNA. Our DNA is also smothered in special proteins. These
proteins can themselves be covered with additional small chemicals. None
of these molecular amendments changes the underlying genetic code. But
adding these chemical groups to the DNA, or to the associated proteins,
or removing them, changes the expression of nearby genes. These changes
in gene expression alter the functions of cells, and the very nature of
the cells themselves. Sometimes, if these patterns of chemical
modifications are put on or taken off at a critical period in
development, the pattern can be set for the rest of our lives, even if
we live to be over a hundred years of age.

There’s no debate that the DNA blueprint is a starting point. A very
important starting point and absolutely necessary, without a doubt. But
it isn’t a sufficient explanation for all the sometimes wonderful,
sometimes awful, complexity of life. If the DNA sequence was all that
mattered, identical twins would always be absolutely identical in every
way. Babies born to malnourished mothers would gain weight as easily as
other babies who had a healthier start in life. And as we shall see in
Chapter 1, we would all look like big amorphous blobs, because all the
cells in our bodies would be completely identical.

Huge areas of biology are influenced by epigenetic mechanisms, and the
revolution in our thinking is spreading further and further into
unexpected frontiers of life on our planet. Some of the other examples
we’ll meet in this book include why we can’t make a baby from two sperm
or two eggs, but have to have one of each. What makes cloning possible?
Why is cloning so difficult? Why do some plants need a period of cold
before they can flower? Since queen bees and worker bees are genetically
identical, why are they completely different in form and function? Why
are all tortoiseshell cats female? Why is it that humans contain
trillions of cells in hundreds of complex organs, and microscopic worms
contain about a thousand cells and only rudimentary organs, but we and
the worm have the same number of genes?

Scientists in both the academic and commercial sectors are also waking
up to the enormous impact that epigenetics has on human health. It’s
implicated in diseases from schizophrenia to rheumatoid arthritis, and
from cancer to chronic pain. There are already two types of drugs that
successfully treat certain cancers by interfering with epigenetic
processes. Pharmaceutical companies are spending hundreds of millions of
dollars in a race to develop the next generation of epigenetic drugs to
treat some of the most serious illnesses afflicting the industrialised
world. Epigenetic therapies are the new frontiers of drug discovery.

In biology, Darwin and Mendel came to define the 19th century as the era
of evolution and genetics; Watson and Crick defined the 20th century as
the era of DNA, and the functional understanding of how genetics and
evolution interact. But in the 21st century it is the new scientific
discipline of epigenetics that is unravelling so much of what we took as
dogma and rebuilding it in an infinitely more varied, more complex and
even more beautiful fashion.

The world of epigenetics is a fascinating one. It’s filled with
remarkable subtlety and complexity, and in Chapters 3 and 4 we’ll delve
deeper into the molecular biology of what’s happening to our genes when
they become epigenetically modified. But like so many of the truly
revolutionary concepts in biology, epigenetics has at its basis some
issues that are so simple they seem completely self-evident as soon as
they are pointed out. Chapter 1 is the single most important example of
such an issue. It’s the investigation which started the epigenetics
revolution.

  Notes on nomenclature

 

There is an international convention on the way that the names of genes
and proteins are written, which we adhere to in this book.

Gene names and symbols are written in italics. The proteins encoded by
the genes are written in plain text.

The symbols for human genes and proteins are written in upper case. For
other species, such as mice, the symbols are usually written with only
the first letter capitalised.

This is summarised for a hypothetical gene in the following table.

 

+----------------+--------------------------+-------------------------+
|                | Human                    | Other e.g. mouse        |
+----------------+--------------------------+-------------------------+
| Gene name      |   SO DAMNED COMPLICATED  |   So Damned Complicated |
+----------------+--------------------------+-------------------------+
| Gene symbol    |   SDC                    |   Sdc                   |
+----------------+--------------------------+-------------------------+
| Protein name   |   SO DAMNED COMPLICATED  |   So Damned Complicated |
+----------------+--------------------------+-------------------------+
| Protein symbol |   SDC                    |   Sdc                   |
+----------------+--------------------------+-------------------------+

 

Like all rules, however, there are a few quirks in this system and while
these conventions apply in general we will encounter some exceptions in
this book.

  Chapter 1

 

  An Ugly Toad and an Elegant Man

 

  Like the toad, ugly and venomous,

  Wears yet a precious jewel in his head

  William Shakespeare

 

Humans are composed of about 50 to 70 trillion cells. That’s right,
50,000,000,000,000 cells. The estimate is a bit vague but that’s hardly
surprising. Imagine we somehow could break a person down into all their
individual cells and then count those cells, at a rate of one cell every
second. Even at the lower estimate it would take us about a million and
a half years, and that’s without stopping for coffee or losing count at
any stage. These cells form a huge range of tissues, all highly
specialised and completely different from one another. Unless something
has gone very seriously wrong, kidneys don’t start growing out of the
top of our heads and there are no teeth in our eyeballs. This seems very
obvious – but why don’t they? It’s actually quite odd, when we remember
that every cell in our body was derived from the division of just one
starter cell. This single cell is called the zygote. A zygote forms when
one sperm merges with one egg. This zygote splits in two; those two
cells divide again and so on, to create the miraculous piece of work
which is a full human body. As they divide the cells become increasingly
different from one another and form specialised cell types. This process
is known as differentiation. It’s a vital one in the formation of any
multicellular organism.

If we look at bacteria down a microscope then pretty much all the
bacteria of a single species look identical. Look at certain human cells
in the same way – say, a food-absorbing cell from the small intestine
and a neuron from the brain – and we would be hard pressed to say that
they were even from the same planet. But so what? Well, the big ‘what’
is that these cells started out with exactly the same genetic material
as one another. And we do mean exactly – this has to be the case,
because they came from just one starter cell, that zygote. So the cells
have become completely different even though they came from one cell
with just one blueprint.

One explanation for this is that the cells are using the same
information in different ways and that’s certainly true. But it’s not
necessarily a statement that takes us much further forwards. In a 1960
adaptation of H. G. Wells’s The Time Machine, starring Rod Taylor as the
time-travelling scientist, there’s a scene where he shows his time
machine to some learned colleagues (all male, naturally) and one asks
for an explanation of how the machine works. Our hero then describes how
the occupant of the machine will travel through time by the following
mechanism:

  In front of him is the lever that controls movement. Forward pressure
  sends the machine into the future. Backward pressure, into the past.
  And the harder the pressure, the faster the machine travels.

Everyone nods sagely at this explanation. The only problem is that this
isn’t an explanation, it’s just a description. And that’s also true of
that statement about cells using the same information in different ways
– it doesn’t really tell us anything, it just re-states what we already
knew in a different way.

What’s much more interesting is the exploration of how cells use the
same genetic information in different ways. Perhaps even more important
is how the cells remember and keep on doing it. Cells in our bone marrow
keep on producing blood cells, cells in our liver keep on producing
liver cells. Why does this happen?

One possible and very attractive explanation is that as cells become
more specialised they rearrange their genetic material, possibly losing
genes they don’t require. The liver is a vital and extremely complicated
organ. The website of the British Liver Trust1 states that the liver
performs over 500 functions, including processing the food that has been
digested by our intestines, neutralising toxins and creating enzymes
that carry out all sorts of tasks in our bodies. But one thing the liver
simply never does is transport oxygen around the body. That job is
carried out by our red blood cells, which are stuffed full of a
particular protein, haemoglobin. Haemoglobin binds oxygen in tissues
where there’s lots available, like our lungs, and then releases it when
the red blood cell reaches a tissue that needs this essential chemical,
such as the tiny blood vessels in the tips of our toes. The liver is
never going to carry out this function, so perhaps it just gets rid of
the haemoglobin gene, which it simply never uses.

It’s a perfectly reasonable suggestion – cells could simply lose genetic
material they aren’t going to use. As they differentiate, cells could
jettison hundreds of genes they no longer need. There could of course be
a slightly less drastic variation on this – maybe the cells shut down
genes they aren’t using. And maybe they do this so effectively that
these genes can never ever be switched on again in that cell, i.e. the
genes are irreversibly inactivated. The key experiments that examined
these eminently reasonable hypotheses – loss of genes, or irreversible
inactivation – involved an ugly toad and an elegant man.

Turning back the biological clock

 

The work has its origins in experiments performed many decades ago in
England by John Gurdon, first in Oxford and subsequently Cambridge. Now
Professor Sir John Gurdon, he still works in a lab in Cambridge, albeit
these days in a gleaming modern building that has been named after him.
He’s an engaging, unassuming and striking man who, 40 years on from his
ground-breaking work, continues to publish research in a field that he
essentially founded.

John Gurdon cuts an instantly recognisable figure around Cambridge. Now
in his seventies, he is tall, thin and has a wonderful head of swept
back blonde hair. He looks like the quintessential older English
gentleman of American movies, and fittingly he went to school at Eton.
There is a lovely story that John Gurdon still treasures a school report
from his biology teacher at that institution which says, ‘I believe
Gurdon has ideas about becoming a scientist. In present showing, this is
quite ridiculous.’2 The teacher’s comments were based on his pupil’s
dislike of mindless rote learning of unconnected facts. But as we shall
see, for a scientist as wonderful as John Gurdon, memory is much less
important than imagination.

In 1937 the Hungarian biochemist Albert Szent-Gyorgyi won the Nobel
Prize for Physiology or Medicine, his achievements including the
discovery of vitamin C. In a phrase that has various subtly different
translations but one consistent interpretation he defined discovery as,
‘To see what everyone else has seen but to think what nobody else has
thought’3. It is probably the best description ever written of what
truly great scientists do. And John Gurdon is truly a great scientist,
and may well follow in Szent-Gyorgyi’s Nobel footsteps. In 2009 he was a
co-recipient of the Lasker Prize, which is to the Nobel what the Golden
Globes are so often to the Oscars. John Gurdon’s work is so wonderful
that when it is first described it seems so obvious, that anyone could
have done it. The questions he asked, and the ways in which he answered
them, have that scientifically beautiful feature of being so elegant
that they seem entirely self-evident.

John Gurdon used non-fertilised toad eggs in his work. Any of us who has
ever kept a tank full of frogspawn and watched this jelly-like mass
develop into tadpoles and finally tiny frogs, has been working, whether
we thought about it in these terms or not, with fertilised eggs, i.e.
ones into which sperm have entered and created a new complete nucleus.
The eggs John Gurdon worked on were a little like these, but hadn’t been
exposed to sperm.

There were good reasons why he chose to use toad eggs in his
experiments. The eggs of amphibians are generally very big, are laid in
large numbers outside the body and are see-through. All these features
make amphibians a very handy experimental species in developmental
biology, as the eggs are technically relatively easy to handle.
Certainly a lot better than a human egg, which is hard to obtain, very
fragile to handle, is not transparent and is so small that we need a
microscope just to see it.

John Gurdon worked on the African clawed toad (Xenopus laevis, to give
it its official title), one of those John Malkovich ugly-handsome
animals, and investigated what happens to cells as they develop and
differentiate and age. He wanted to see if a tissue cell from an adult
toad still contained all the genetic material it had started with, or if
it had lost or irreversibly inactivated some as the cell became more
specialised. The way he did this was to take a nucleus from the cell of
an adult toad and insert it into an unfertilised egg that had had its
own nucleus removed. This technique is called somatic cell nuclear
transfer (SCNT), and will come up over and over again. ‘Somatic’ comes
from the Greek word for ‘body’.

After he’d performed the SCNT, John Gurdon kept the eggs in a suitable
environment (much like a child with a tank of frogspawn) and waited to
see if any of these cultured eggs hatched into little toad tadpoles.

The experiments were designed to test the following hypothesis: ‘As
cells become more specialised (differentiated) they undergo an
irreversible loss/inactivation of genetic material.’ There were two
possible outcomes to these experiments:

Either

The hypothesis was correct and the ‘adult’ nucleus has lost some of the
original blueprint for creating a new individual. Under these
circumstances an adult nucleus will never be able to replace the nucleus
in an egg and so will never generate a new healthy toad, with all its
varied and differentiated tissues.

Or

The hypothesis was wrong, and new toads can be created by removing the
nucleus from an egg and replacing it with one from adult tissues.

Other researchers had started to look at this before John Gurdon decided
to tackle the problem – two scientists called Briggs and King using a
different amphibian, the frog Rana pipiens. In 1952 they transplanted
the nuclei from cells at a very early stage of development into an egg
lacking its own original nucleus and they obtained viable frogs. This
demonstrated that it was technically possible to transfer a nucleus from
another cell into an ‘empty’ egg without killing the cell. However,
Briggs and King then published a second paper using the same system but
transferring a nucleus from a more developed cell type and this time
they couldn’t create any frogs. The difference in the cells used for the
nuclei in the two papers seems astonishingly minor – just one day older
and no froglets. This supported the hypothesis that some sort of
irreversible inactivation event had taken place as the cells
differentiated. A lesser man than John Gurdon might have been put off by
this. Instead he spent over a decade working on the problem.

The design of the experiments was critical. Imagine we have started
reading detective stories by Agatha Christie. After we’ve read our first
three we develop the following hypothesis: ‘The killer in an Agatha
Christie novel is always the doctor.’ We read three more and the doctor
is indeed the murderer in each. Have we proved our hypothesis? No.
There’s always going to be the thought that maybe we should read just
one more to be sure. And what if some are out of print, or unobtainable?
No matter how many we read, we may never be entirely sure that we’ve
read the entire collection. But that’s the joy of disproving hypotheses.
All we need is one instance in which Poirot or Miss Marple reveal that
the doctor was a man of perfect probity and the killer was actually the
vicar, and our hypothesis is shot to pieces. And that is how the best
scientific experiments are designed – to disprove, not to prove an idea.

And that was the genius of John Gurdon’s work. When he performed his
experiments what he was attempting was exceptionally challenging with
the technology of the time. If he failed to generate toads from the
adult nuclei this could simply mean his technique had something wrong
with it. No matter how many times he did the experiment without getting
any toads, this wouldn’t actually prove the hypothesis. But if he did
generate live toads from eggs where the original nucleus had been
replaced by the adult nucleus he would have disproved the hypothesis. He
would have demonstrated beyond doubt that when cells differentiate,
their genetic material isn’t irreversibly lost or changed. The beauty of
this approach is that just one such toad would topple the entire theory
– and topple it he did.

John Gurdon is incredibly generous in his acknowledgement of the
collegiate nature of scientific research, and the benefits he obtained
from being in dynamic laboratories and universities. He was lucky to
start his work in a well set-up laboratory which had a new piece of
equipment which produced ultraviolet light. This enabled him to kill off
the original nuclei of the recipient eggs without causing too much
damage, and also ‘softened up’ the cell so that he could use tiny glass
hypodermic needles to inject donor nuclei. Other workers in the lab had,
in some unrelated research, developed a strain of toads which had a
mutation with an easily detectable, but non-damaging effect. Like almost
all mutations this was carried in the nucleus, not the cytoplasm. The
cytoplasm is the thick liquid inside cells, in which the nucleus sits.
So John Gurdon used eggs from one strain and donor nuclei from the
mutated strain. This way he would be able to show unequivocally that any
resulting toads had been coded for by the donor nuclei, and weren’t just
the result of experimental error, as could happen if a few recipient
nuclei had been left over after treatment.

John Gurdon spent around fifteen years, starting in the late 1950s,
demonstrating that in fact nuclei from specialised cells are able to
create whole animals if placed in the right environment i.e. an
unfertilised egg4. The more differentiated/specialised the donor cell
was, the less successful the process in terms of numbers of animals, but
that’s the beauty of disproving a hypothesis – we might need a lot of
toad eggs to start with but we don’t need to end up with many live toads
to make our case. Just one non-murderous doctor will do it, remember?

So John Gurdon showed us that although there is something in cells that
can keep specific genes turned on or switched off in different cell
types, whatever this something is, it can’t be loss or permanent
inactivation of genetic material, because if he put an adult nucleus
into the right environment – in this case an ‘empty’ unfertilised egg –
it forgot all about this memory of which cell type it came from. It went
back to being a naive nucleus from an embryo and started the whole
developmental process again.

Epigenetics is the ‘something’ in these cells. The epigenetic system
controls how the genes in DNA are used, in some cases for hundreds of
cell division cycles, and the effects are inherited from when cells
divide. Epigenetic modifications to the essential blueprint exist over
and above the genetic code, on top of it, and program cells for decades.
But under the right circumstances, this layer of epigenetic information
can be removed to reveal the same shiny DNA sequence that was always
there. That’s what happened when John Gurdon placed the nuclei from
fully differentiated cells into the unfertilised egg cells.

Did John Gurdon know what this process was when he generated his new
baby toads? No. Does that make his achievement any less magnificent? Not
at all. Darwin knew nothing about genes when he developed the theory of
evolution through natural selection. Mendel knew nothing about DNA when,
in an Austrian monastery garden, he developed his idea of inherited
factors that are transmitted ‘true’ from generation to generation of
peas. It doesn’t matter. They saw what nobody else had seen and suddenly
we all had a new way of viewing the world.

The epigenetic landscape

 

Oddly enough, there was a conceptual framework that was in existence
when John Gurdon performed his work. Go to any conference with the word
‘epigenetics’ in the title and at some point one of the speakers will
refer to something called ‘Waddington’s epigenetic landscape’. They will
show the grainy image seen in Figure 1.1.

Conrad Waddington was a hugely influential British polymath. He was born
in 1903 in India but was sent back to England to go to school. He
studied at Cambridge University but spent most of his career at the
University of Edinburgh. His academic interests ranged from
developmental biology to the visual arts to philosophy, and the
cross-fertilisation between these areas is evident in the new ways of
thinking that he pioneered.

[1-1.tif]

 

Figure 1.1 The image created by Conrad Waddington to represent the
epigenetic landscape. The position of the ball represents different cell
fates.

 

Waddington presented his metaphorical epigenetic landscape in 1957 to
exemplify concepts of developmental biology5. The landscape merits quite
a bit of discussion. As you can see, there is a ball at the top of a
hill. As the ball rolls down the hill, it can roll into one of several
troughs towards the bottom of the hill. Visually this immediately
suggests various things to us, because we have all at some point in our
childhood rolled balls down hills, or stairs, or something.

What do we immediately understand when we see the image of Waddington’s
landscape? We know that once a ball has reached the bottom it is likely
to stay there unless we do something to it. We know that to get the ball
back up to the top will be harder than rolling it down the hill in the
first place. We also know that to roll the ball out of one trough and
into another will be hard. It might even be easier to roll it part or
all of the way back up and then direct it into a new trough, than to try
and roll it directly from one trough to another. This is especially true
if the two troughs we’re interested in are separated by more than one
hillock.

This image is incredibly powerful in helping to visualise what might be
happening during cellular development. The ball at the top of the hill
is the zygote, the single cell that results from the fusion of one egg
and one sperm. As the various cells of the body begin to differentiate
(become more specialised), each cell is like a ball that has rolled
further down the hill and headed into one of the troughs. Once it has
gone as far as it can go, it’s going to stay there. Unless something
extraordinarily dramatic happens, that cell is never going to turn into
another cell type (jump across to another trough). Nor is it going to
move back up to the top of the hill and then roll down again to give
rise to all sorts of different cell types.

Like the time traveller’s levers, Waddington’s landscape at first just
seems like another description. But it’s more than that, it’s a model
that helps us to develop ways of thinking. Just like so many of the
scientists in this chapter, Waddington didn’t know the details of the
mechanisms but that didn’t really matter. He gave us a way of thinking
about a problem that was useful.

John Gurdon’s experiments had shown that sometimes, if he pushed hard
enough, he could move a cell from the very bottom of a trough at the
bottom of the hill, right the way back up to the top. From there it can
roll down and become any other cell type once more. And every toad that
John Gurdon and his team created taught us two other important things.
The first is that cloning – the recreation of an animal from the cells
of an adult – is possible, because that’s what he had achieved. The
second thing it taught us is that cloning is really difficult, because
he had to perform hundreds of SCNTs for every toad that he managed to
generate.

That’s why there was such a furore in 1996 when Keith Campbell and Ian
Wilmut at the Roslin Institute created the first mammalian clone, Dolly
the sheep6. Like John Gurdon, they used SCNT. In the case of Dolly, the
scientists transferred the nucleus from a cell in the mammary gland of
an adult ewe into an unfertilised sheep egg from which they had removed
the original nucleus. Then they transplanted this into the uterus of a
recipient ewe. Pioneers of cloning were nothing if not obsessively
persistent. Campbell and Wilmut performed nearly 300 nuclear transfers
before they obtained that one iconic animal, which now revolves in a
glass case in the Royal Scottish Museum in Edinburgh. Even today, when
all sorts of animals have been cloned, from racehorses to prize cattle
and even pet dogs and cats, the process is incredibly inefficient. Two
questions have remained remarkably pertinent since Dolly tottered on her
soon to be prematurely arthritic legs into the pages of history. The
first is why is cloning animals so inefficient? The second is why are
the animals so often less healthy than ‘natural’ offspring? The answer
in both cases is epigenetics, and the molecular explanations will become
apparent as we move through our exploration of the field. But before we
do, we’re going to take our cue from H. G. Wells’s time traveller and
fast-forward over thirty years from John Gurdon in Cambridge to a
laboratory in Japan, where an equally obsessive scientist has found a
completely new way of cloning animals from adult cells.

  Chapter 2

 

  How We Learned to Roll Uphill

 

  Any intelligent fool can make things bigger and more complex … It
  takes a touch of genius and a lot of courage to move in the opposite
  direction.

  Albert Einstein

 

Let’s move on about 40 years from John Gurdon’s work, and a decade on
from Dolly. There is so much coverage in the press about cloned mammals
that we might think this procedure has become routine and easy. The
reality is that it is still highly time-consuming and laborious to
create clones by nuclear transfer, and consequently it’s generally a
very costly process. Much of the problem lies in the fact that the
process relies on manually transferring somatic nuclei into eggs. Unlike
the amphibians that John Gurdon worked on, there’s the additional
problem that mammals don’t produce very many eggs at once. Mammalian
eggs also have to be extracted carefully from the body, they aren’t just
ejected into a tank like toad eggs. Mammalian eggs have to be cultured
incredibly delicately to keep them healthy and alive. Researchers need
to remove the nucleus manually from an egg, inject in a nucleus from an
adult cell (without damaging anything), then keep culturing the cells
really, really carefully until they can be implanted into the uterus of
another female. This is incredibly intensive and painstaking work and we
can only do it one cell at a time.

For many years, scientists had a dream of how they would carry out
cloning in an ideal world. They would take really accessible cells from
the adult mammal they wanted to clone. A small sample of cells scraped
from the skin would be a pleasantly easy option. Then they would treat
these cells in the laboratory, adding specific genes, or proteins, or
chemicals. This treatment would change the way the nuclei of these cells
behaved. Instead of acting like the nucleus of a skin cell, they would
act the same way as nuclei from newly fertilised eggs. The treatment
would therefore have the same ultimate effect as transferring the nuclei
from adult cells into fertilised eggs, from which their own nuclei had
been removed. The beauty of such a hypothetical scheme is that we’d have
bypassed most of the really difficult and time-consuming steps that
require such a high level of technical skill in manipulating tiny cells.
This would make it an easily accessible technique and one that could be
carried out on lots of cells simultaneously, rather than just one
nuclear transfer at a time.

Okay, we’d still have to find a way of putting them into a surrogate
mother, but we only have to go down the surrogate mother route if we
want to generate a complete individual. Sometimes this is exactly what
we want – to re-create a prize bull or prize stallion, for example, but
this is not what most sane people want to do with humans. Indeed cloning
humans (reproductive cloning) is banned in pretty much every country
which has the scientists and the infrastructure to undertake such a
task. But actually for most purposes we don’t need to go as far as this
stage for cloning to be useful for humans. What we need are cells that
have the potential to turn into lots of other cell types. These are the
cells that are known as stem cells, and they are metaphorically near the
top of Waddington’s epigenetic landscape. The reason we need such cells
lies in the nature of the diseases that are major problems in the
developed world.

In the rich parts of our planet the diseases that kill most of us are
chronic. They take a long time to develop and often they take a long
time to kill us when they do. Take heart disease, for example – if
someone survives the initial heart attack they don’t necessarily ever go
back to having a totally healthy heart again. During the attack some of
the heart muscle cells (cardiomyocytes) may become starved of oxygen and
die. We might imagine this would be no problem, as surely the heart can
create replacement cells? After all, if we donate blood, our bone marrow
can make more red blood cells. Similarly, we have to do an awful lot of
damage to the liver before it stops being able to regenerate and repair
itself. But the heart is different. Cardiomyocytes are referred to as
‘terminally differentiated’ – they have gone right to the bottom of
Waddington’s hill and are stuck in a particular trough. Unlike bone
marrow or liver, the heart doesn’t have an accessible reservoir of less
specialised cells (cardiac stem cells) that could turn into new
cardiomyocytes. So, the long-term problem that follows a heart attack is
that our bodies can’t make new cardiac muscle cells. The body does the
only thing it can and replaces the dead cardiomyocytes with connective
tissue, and the heart never beats in quite the same way it did before.

Similar things happen in so many diseases – the insulin-secreting cells
that are lost when teenagers develop type 1 diabetes, the brain cells
that are lost in Alzheimer’s disease, the cartilage producing cells that
disappear during osteoarthritis – the list goes on and on. It would be
great if we could replace these with new cells, identical to our own.
This way we wouldn’t have to deal with all the rejection issues that
make organ transplants such a challenge, or with the lack of
availability of donors. Using stem cells in this way is referred to as
therapeutic cloning; creating cells identical to a specific individual
in order to treat a disease.

For over 40 years we’ve known that in theory this could be possible.
John Gurdon’s work and all that followed after him showed that adult
cells contain the blueprints for all the cells of the body if we can
only find the correct way of accessing them. John Gurdon had taken
nuclei from adult toads, put them into toad eggs and been able to push
those nuclei all the way back up Waddington’s landscape and create new
animals. The adult nuclei had been – and this word is critical –
reprogrammed. Ian Wilmut and Keith Campbell had done pretty much the
same thing with sheep. The important common feature to recognise here is
that in each case the reprogramming only worked when the adult nucleus
was placed inside an unfertilised egg. It was the egg that was really
important. We can’t clone an animal by taking an adult nucleus and
putting it into some other cell type.

Why not?

We need a little cell biology here. The nucleus contains the vast
majority of the DNA/genes that encode us – our blueprint. There’s a
miniscule fraction of DNA that isn’t in the nucleus, it’s in tiny
structures called mitochondria, but we don’t need to worry about that
here. When we’re first taught about cells in school it’s almost as if
the nucleus is all powerful and the rest of the cell – the cytoplasm –
is a bag of liquid that doesn’t really do much. Nothing could be further
from the truth, and this is especially the case for the egg, because the
toads and Dolly have taught us that the cytoplasm of the egg is
absolutely key. Something, or some things, in that egg cytoplasm
actively reprogrammed the adult nucleus that the experimenters injected
into it. These unknown factors moved a nucleus from the bottom of one of
Waddington’s troughs right back to the top of the landscape.

Nobody really understood how the cytoplasm of eggs could convert adult
nuclei into ones like zygotes. There was pretty much an assumption that
whatever it was must be incredibly complicated and difficult to unravel.
Often in science really big questions have smaller, more manageable
questions inside them. So a number of labs tackled a conceptually
simpler, but technically still hugely challenging issue.

Endless potential

 

Remember that ball at the top of Waddington’s landscape. In cellular
terms it’s the zygote and it’s referred to as totipotent, that is, it
has the potential to form every cell in the body, including the
placenta. Of course, zygotes by definition are rather limited in number
and most scientists working in very early development use cells from a
bit later, the famous embryonic stem (ES) cells. These are created as a
result of normal developmental pathways. The zygote divides a few times
to create a bundle of cells called the blastocyst. Although the
blastocyst typically has less than 150 cells it’s already an early
embryo with two distinct compartments. There’s an outer layer called the
trophectoderm, which will eventually form the placenta and other
extra-embryonic tissues, and an inner cell mass (ICM).

Figure 2.1 shows what the blastocyst looks like. The drawing is in two
dimensions but in reality the blastocyst is a three-dimensional
structure, so the actual shape is that of a tennis ball that’s had a
golf ball glued inside it.

[Fig-1.eps]

 

Figure 2.1 A diagram of the mammalian blastocyst. The cells of the
trophectoderm will give rise to the placenta. During normal development,
the cells of the Inner Cell Mass (ICM) will give rise to the tissues of
the embryo. Under laboratory conditions, the cells of the ICM can be
grown in culture as pluripotent embryonic stem (ES) cells.

 

The cells of the ICM can be grown in the lab in culture dishes. They’re
fiddly to maintain and require specialised culture conditions and
careful handling, but do it right and they reward us by dividing a
limitless number of times and staying the same as the parent cell. These
are the ES cells and as their full name suggests, they can form every
cell of the embryo and ultimately of the mature animal. They aren’t
totipotent – they can’t make placenta – so they are called pluripotent
because they make pretty much anything else.

These ES cells have been invaluable for understanding what’s important
for keeping cells in a pluripotent state. Over the years a number of
leading scientists including Azim Surani in Cambridge, Austin Smith in
Edinburgh, Rudolf Jaenisch in Boston and Shinya Yamanaka in Kyoto have
devoted huge amounts of time to identifying the genes and proteins
expressed (switched on) in ES cells. They particularly tried to identify
genes that keep the ES cells in a pluripotent state. These genes are
extraordinarily important because ES cells seem to be very prone to turn
into other cell types in culture if you don’t keep the conditions just
right. Just a small change in culture conditions, for example, and a
culture dish full of one-time ES cells can differentiate into
cardiomyocytes and do what heart cells do best: they beat along in time
with one another. A slightly different change in conditions – altering
the delicate balance of chemicals in the culture fluid, for example, can
divert the ES cells away from the cardiac route and start the
development of cells that give rise to the neurons in our brains.

Scientists working on ES cells identified a whole slew of genes that
were important for keeping the cells pluripotent. The functions of the
various genes they identified weren’t necessarily identical. Some were
important for self-renewal, i.e. one ES dividing to form two ES cells,
whereas others were required to stop the cells from differentiating1.

So, by the early years of the 21st century scientists had found a way of
maintaining pluripotent ES cells in culture dishes and they knew quite a
lot about their biology. They had also worked out how to change the
culture conditions so that the ES cells would differentiate into various
cell types including liver cells, heart cells, neurons etc. But how does
this help with the dream we laid out earlier? Could the labs use this
information to create new ways of driving cells backwards, to the top of
Waddington’s landscape? Would it be possible to take a fully
differentiated cell and treat it in a lab so that it would become just
like an ES cell, with all the potential that implies? Whilst scientists
had good reason to believe this would be theoretically possible, that’s
a long way from actually being able to do it. But it was a wonderfully
tantalising prospect for scientists interested in using stem cells to
treat human diseases.

By the middle of the first decade of this century, over twenty genes had
been identified that seemed to be critical to ES cells. It wasn’t
necessarily clear how they worked together and there was every reason to
think that there was still plenty we didn’t understand about the biology
of ES cells. It was assumed that it would be almost inconceivably
difficult to take a mature cell and essentially recreate the vastly
complex intracellular conditions that are found in an ES cell.

The triumph of optimism

 

Sometimes the greatest scientific breakthroughs happen because someone
ignores the prevailing pessimism. In this case, the optimist who decided
to test what everyone else had assumed was impossible was the
aforementioned Shinya Yamanaka, with his postdoctoral research associate
Kazutoshi Takahashi.

Professor Yamanaka is one of the youngest luminaries in the stem cell
and pluripotency field. He was born in Osaka in the early 1960s and
rather unusually he has held successful academic positions in high
profile institutions in both Japan and the USA. He originally trained as
a clinician and became an orthopaedic surgeon. Specialists in this
discipline are sometimes dismissed by other surgeons as ‘the hammer and
chisel brigade’. This is unfair, but it is true that orthopaedic
surgical practice is about as far away from elegant molecular biology
and stem cell science as it’s possible to get.

Perhaps more than any of the other researchers working in the stem cell
field, Professor Yamanaka had been driven by a desire to find a way of
creating pluripotent cells from differentiated cells in a lab. He
started this stage of his work with a list of 24 genes which were
vitally important in ES cells. These were all genes called ‘pluripotency
genes’ – they have to be switched on if ES cells are to remain
pluripotent. If you use various experimental techniques to switch these
genes off, the ES cells start to differentiate, just like those beating
heart cells in the culture dish, and they never revert to being ES cells
again. Indeed, that is partly what happens quite naturally during
mammalian development, when cells differentiate and become specialised –
they switch off these pluripotency genes.

Shinya Yamanaka decided to test if combinations of these genes would
drive differentiated cells backwards to a more primitive developmental
stage. It seemed a long shot and there was always the worry that if the
results were negative – i.e. if none of the cells went ‘backwards’ – he
wouldn’t know if it was because it just wasn’t possible or if he just
hadn’t got the experimental conditions right. This was a risk for an
established scientist like Yamanaka, but it was an even bigger gamble
for a relatively junior associate like Takahashi, because of the way
that the scientific career ladder works.

When faced with the exposure of damaging personal love letters, the Duke
of Wellington famously responded, ‘Publish and be damned!’ The mantra
for scientists is almost the same but differs in one critical respect.
For us, it’s ‘publish or be damned’ – if you don’t publish papers, you
can’t get research funding and you can’t get jobs in universities. And
it is rare indeed to get a paper into a good journal if the message of
your years of effort boils down to, ‘I tried and I tried but it didn’t
work.’ So to take on a project with relatively little likelihood of
positive results is a huge leap of faith and we have to admire
Takahashi’s courage, in particular.

Yamanaka and Takahashi chose their 24 genes and decided to test them in
a cell type known as MEFs – mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Fibroblasts are
the main cells in connective tissue and are found in all sorts of organs
including skin. They’re really easy to extract and they grow very easily
in culture, so are a great source of cells for experiments. Because the
ones known as MEFs are from embryos the hope was that they would still
retain a bit of capacity to revert to very early cell types under the
right conditions.

Remember how John Gurdon used donor and acceptor toad strains that had
different genetically-encoded markers, so he could tell which nuclei had
generated the new animals? Yamanaka did something similar. He used cells
from mice which had an extra gene added. This gene is called the
neomycin resistance (neoR) gene and it does exactly what it says on the
can. Neomycin is an antibiotic-type compound that normally kills
mammalian cells. But if the cells have been genetically engineered to
express the neoR gene, they will survive. When Yamanaka created the mice
he needed for his experiments he inserted the neoR gene in a particular
way. This meant that the neoR gene would only get switched on if the
cell it was in had become pluripotent. The cell had to be behaving like
an ES cell. So if his experiments to push the fibroblasts backwards
experimentally into the undifferentiated ES cell state were successful,
the cells would keep growing, even when a lethal dose of the antibiotic
was added. If the experiments were unsuccessful, all the cells would
die.

Professor Yamanaka and Doctor Takahashi inserted the 24 genes they
wanted to test into specially designed molecules called vectors. These
act like Trojan horses, carrying high concentrations of the ‘extra’ DNA
into the fibroblasts. Once in the cell, the genes were switched on and
produced their specific proteins. Introducing these vectors can be done
relatively easily on a large number of cells at once, using chemical
treatments or electrical pulses (no fiddly micro-injections for
Yamanaka, no indeed). When Shinya Yamanaka used all 24 genes
simultaneously, some of the cells survived the neomycin treatment. It
was only a tiny fraction of the cells but it was an encouraging result
nonetheless. It meant these cells had switched on the neoR gene. This
implied they were behaving like ES cells. But if he used the genes
singly, no cells survived. Shinya Yamanaka and Kazutoshi Takahashi then
added various sets of 23 genes to the cells. They used the results from
these experiments to identify ten genes that were each really critical
for creating the neomycin-resistant pluripotent cells. By testing
various combinations from these ten genes they finally hit on the
smallest number of genes that could act together to turn embryonic
fibroblasts into ES-like cells.

The magic number turned out to be four. When the fibroblasts were
invaded by vectors carrying genes called Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc
something quite extraordinary happened. The cells survived in neomycin,
showing they had switched on the neoR gene and were therefore like ES
cells. Not only that, but the fibroblasts began to change shape to look
like ES cells. Using various experimental systems, the researchers were
able to turn these reprogrammed cells into the three major tissue types
from which all organs of the mammalian body are formed – ectoderm,
mesoderm and endoderm. Normal ES cells can also do this. Fibroblasts
never can. Shinya Yamanaka then showed that he could repeat the whole
process using fibroblasts from adult mice rather than embryos as his
starting material. This showed that his method didn’t rely on some
special feature of embryonic cells, but could also be applied to cells
from completely differentiated and mature organisms.

Yamanaka called the cells that he created ‘induced pluripotent stem
cells’ and the acronym – iPS cells – is now familiar terminology to
everyone working in biology. When we consider that this phrase didn’t
even exist five years ago, its universal recognition amongst scientists
shows just how important a breakthrough this really is.

It’s incredible to think that mammalian cells carry about 20,000 genes,
and yet it only takes four to turn a fully differentiated cell into
something that is pluripotent. With just four genes Professor Yamanaka
was able to push the ball right from the bottom of one of Waddington’s
troughs, all the way back up to the top of the landscape.

It wasn’t surprising that Shinya Yamanaka and Kazutoshi Takahashi
published their findings in Cell, the world’s most prestigious
biological journal2. What was a bit surprising was the reaction.
Everyone in 2006 knew this was huge, but they knew it was only huge if
it was right. An awful lot of scientists couldn’t really believe that it
was. They didn’t for one moment think that Professor Yamanaka and Doctor
Takahashi were lying, or had done anything fraudulent. They just thought
they had probably got something wrong, because really, it couldn’t be
that simple. It was analogous to someone searching for the Holy Grail
and finding it the second place they looked, under the peas at the back
of the freezer.

The obvious thing of course would be for someone to repeat Yamanaka’s
work and see if they could get the same results. It may seem odd to
people working outside science, but there wasn’t an avalanche of labs
that wanted to do this. It had taken Shinya Yamanaka and Kazutoshi
Takahashi two years to run their experiments, which were time-consuming
and required meticulous control of all stages. Labs would also be
heavily committed to their existing programmes of research and didn’t
necessarily want to be diverted. Additionally, the organisations that
fund researchers to carry out specific programmes of work are apt to
look a bit askance if a lab head suddenly abandons a programme of agreed
research to do something entirely different. This would be particularly
damaging if the end result was a load of negative data. Effectively,
that meant that only an exceptionally well-funded lab, with the best
equipment and a very self-confident head, would even think of ‘wasting
time’ repeating someone else’s experiments.

Rudolf Jaenisch from The Whitehead Institute in Boston is a colossus in
the field of creating genetically engineered animals. Originally from
Germany, he has worked in the USA for almost the last 30 years. With
curly grey hair and a frankly impressive moustache, he is immediately
recognisable at conferences. It was perhaps unsurprising that he was the
scientist who took the risk of diverting some of the work in his lab to
see if Shinya Yamanaka really had achieved the seemingly impossible.
After all, Rudolf Jaenisch is on record stating that, ‘I have done many
high risk projects through the years, but I believe that if you have an
exciting idea, you must live with the chance of failure and pursue the
experiment.’

At a conference in Colorado in April 2007 Professor Jaenisch stood up to
give his presentation and announced that he had repeated Yamanaka’s
experiments. They worked. Yamanaka was right. You could make iPS cells
by introducing just four genes into a differentiated cell. The effect on
the audience was dramatic. The atmosphere was like one of those great
moments in old movies where the jury delivers its verdict and all the
hacks dash off to call the editor.

Rudolf Jaenisch was gracious – he freely conceded that he had carried
out the experiments because he just knew that Yamanaka couldn’t be
right. The field went crazy after that. First, the really big labs
involved in stem cell research started using Yamanaka’s technique,
refining and improving it so it worked more efficiently. Within a couple
of years even labs that had never cultured a single ES cell were
generating iPS cells from tissues and donors they were interested in.
Papers on iPS cells are now published every week of the year. The
technique has been adapted for direct conversion of human fibroblasts
into human neuronal cells without having to create iPS cells first3.
This is equivalent to rolling a ball halfway up Waddington’s epigenetic
landscape and then back down into a different trough.

It’s hard not to wonder if it was frustrating for Shinya Yamanaka that
nobody else seemed to take up his work until the American laboratory
showed that he was right. He shared the 2009 Lasker Prize with John
Gurdon so maybe he’s not really all that concerned. His reputation is
now assured.

Follow the money

 

If all we read is the scientific literature, then the narrative for this
story is quite inspiring and fairly straightforward. But there’s another
source of information, and that’s the patent landscape, which typically
doesn’t emerge from the mist until some time after the papers in the
peer-reviewed journals. Once the patent applications in this field
started appearing, a somewhat more complicated tale began to unfold. It
takes a while for this to happen, because patents remain confidential
for the first year to eighteen months after they are submitted to the
patent offices. This is to protect the interests of the inventors, as
this period of grace gives them time to get on with work on confidential
areas without declaring to the world what they’ve invented. The
important thing to realise is that both Yamanaka and Jaenisch have filed
patents on their research into controlling cell fate. Both of these
patent applications have been granted and it is likely that cases will
go to court to test who can really get protection for what. And the odd
thing, given that Yamanaka published first, is the fact that Jaenisch
filed a patent on this field before him.

How could that be? It’s partly because a patent application can be quite
speculative. The applicant doesn’t have to have proof of every single
thing that they claim. They can use the grace period to try to obtain
some proof to support their assertions from the original claim. In US
legal terms Shinya Yamanaka’s patent dates from 13 December 2005 and
covers the work described a few paragraphs ago – how to take a somatic
cell and use the four factors – Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc – to turn it
into a pluripotent cell. Rudolf Jaenisch’s patent potentially could have
a legal first date of 26 November 2003. It contains a number of
technical aspects and it makes claims around expressing a pluripotency
gene in a somatic cell. One of the genes it suggests is Oct4. Oct4 had
been known for some time to be vital for the pluripotent state, after
all, that’s one of the reasons why Yamanaka had included it in his
original reprogramming experiments. The legal arguments around these
patents are likely to run and run.

But why did these labs, run by fabulous and highly creative scientists,
file these patents in the first place? Theoretically, a patent allows
the holder access to an exclusive means of doing something. However, in
academic circles nobody ever tries to stop an academic scientist in
another lab from running a basic science experiment. What the patent is
really for is to make sure that the original inventor makes money out of
their good idea, instead of other people cashing in on their
inventiveness.

The most profitable patents of all in biology tend to be things that can
be used to treat disease in people, or that help researchers to develop
new treatments faster. And that’s why there is going to be such a battle
over the Jaenisch and Yamanaka patents. The courts may decide that every
time someone makes iPS cells, money will have to be paid to the
researchers and institutions who own the original ideas. If companies
sell iPS cells that they make, and have to give a percentage of the
income back to the patent holders, the potential returns could be
substantial. It’s worth looking at why these cells are viewed as
potentially so valuable in monetary terms.

Let’s take just one disease, type 1 diabetes. This typically starts in
childhood when certain cells in the pancreas (the delightfully named
beta cells in the Islets of Langerhans) are destroyed through processes
that aren’t yet clear. Once lost, these cells never grow back and as a
consequence the patient is no longer able to produce the hormone
insulin. Without insulin it’s impossible to control blood sugar levels
and the consequences of this are potentially catastrophic. Until we
found ways of extracting insulin from pigs and administering it to
patients, children and young adults routinely died as a result of
diabetes. Even now, when we can administer insulin relatively easily
(normally an artificially synthesised human form), there are a lot of
drawbacks. Patients have to monitor their blood sugar levels multiple
times a day and alter their insulin dose and food intake to try and stay
within certain boundaries. It’s hard to do this consistently over many
years, especially for a teenager. How many adolescents are motivated by
things that might go wrong when they are 40? Long-term type 1 diabetics
are prone to a vast range of complications, including loss of vision,
poor circulation that can lead to amputations, and kidney disease.

It would be great if, instead of injecting insulin every day, diabetics
could just receive new beta cells. The patient could then produce their
own insulin once more. The body’s own internal mechanisms are usually
really good at controlling blood sugar levels so most of the
complications would probably be avoided. The problem is that there are
no cells in the body that are able to create beta cells (they are at the
bottom of one of Waddington’s troughs) so we would need to use either a
pancreas transplant or perhaps change some human ES cells into beta
cells and put those into the patient.

There are two big problems in doing this. The first is that donor
materials (either ES cells or a whole pancreas) are in short supply so
there’s nowhere near enough to supply all the diabetics. But even if
there were enough, there’s still the problem that they won’t be the same
as the patient’s tissues. The patient’s immune system will recognise
them as foreign and try to reject them. The person might be able to come
off insulin but would probably need to be on immuno-suppressive drugs
all their life. This is not really that much of a trade-off, as these
drugs have a range of pretty awful side-effects.

iPS cells suddenly create a new way forwards. Take a small scraping of
skin cells from our patient, whom we shall call Freddy. Grow these cells
in culture until we have enough to work with (this is pretty easy). Use
the four Yamanaka factors to create a large number of iPS cells, treat
these in the lab to turn them into beta cells and put them back into the
patient. There will be no immune rejection because Freddy will just be
receiving Freddy cells. Recently, researchers have shown they can do
exactly this in mouse models of diabetes4.

It won’t be that simple of course. There are a whole range of
technological hurdles to overcome, not least the fact that one of the
four Yamanaka factors, c-Myc, is known to promote cancer. But in the few
years since that key publication in Cell, substantial progress has been
made in improving the technology so that it is moving ever closer to the
clinic. It’s possible to make human iPS cells pretty much as easily as
mouse ones and you don’t always need to use c-Myc5. There are ways of
creating the cells that take away some of the other worrying safety
problems as well. For example, the first methods for creating iPS cells
used animal products in the cell culture stages. This is always a worry,
because of fears about transmitting weird animal diseases into the human
population. But researchers have now found synthetic replacements for
these animal products6. The whole field of iPS production is getting
better all the time. But we’re not over the line yet.

One of the problems commercially is that we don’t yet know what the
regulatory authorities will demand by way of safety and supporting data
before they let iPS cells be used in humans. Currently, licensing iPS
cells for therapeutic use would involve two different areas of medical
regulation. This is because we would be giving a patient cells (cell
therapy) which had been genetically modified (gene therapy). Regulators
are wary particularly because so many of the gene therapy trials that
were launched with such enthusiasm in the 1980s and 1990s either had
little benefit for the patient or sometimes even terrible and unforeseen
consequences, including induction of lethal cancers7. The number of
potentially costly regulatory hurdles iPS cells will have to get over
before they can be given to patients is huge. We might think no investor
would put any money into something so potentially risky. Yet invest they
do, and that’s because if researchers can get this technology right the
return on the investment could be huge.

Here’s just one calculation. At a conservative estimate, it costs about
$500 per month in the United States to supply insulin and blood sugar
monitoring equipment for a diabetic. That’s $6,000 a year, so if a
patient lives with diabetes for 40 years that’s $240,000 over their
lifetime. Then add in the costs of all the treatments that even
well-managed diabetic patients will need for the complications they are
likely to suffer because of their illness. It’s fairly easy to see how
each patient’s diabetes-related lifetime healthcare costs could be at
least a million dollars. And there are at least a million type 1
diabetics in the US alone. This means that at the very least, the US
economy spends over a billion dollars every four years, just in treating
type 1 diabetes. So even if iPS cells cost a lot to get into the clinic,
they have the potential to make an enormous return on investment if they
work out cheaper than the lifetime cost of current therapies.

That’s just for diabetes. There are a whole host of other diseases for
which iPS cells could provide an answer. Just a few examples include
patients with blood clotting disorders, such as haemophilias;
Parkinson’s disease; osteo-arthritis and blindness caused by macular
degeneration. As science and technology get better at creating
artificial structures that can be implanted into our bodies, iPS cells
will be used for replacing damaged blood vessels in heart disease, and
regenerating tissues destroyed by cancer or its treatment.

The US Department of Defense is providing funding into iPS cells. The
military always needs plenty of blood in any combat situation so that it
can treat wounded personnel. Red blood cells aren’t like most cells in
our bodies. They have no nucleus, which means they can’t divide to form
new cells. This makes red blood cells a relatively safe type of iPS cell
to start using clinically, as they won’t stay in the body for more than
a few weeks. We also don’t reject these cells in the same way that we
would a donor kidney, for example, because there are differences in the
ways our immune systems recognise these cells. Different people can have
compatible red blood cells – it’s the famous ABO blood type system, plus
some added complications. It’s been calculated that we could take just
40 donors of specific blood types, and create a bank of iPS cells from
those people that would supply all our needs8. Because iPS cells can
keep on dividing to create more iPS cells when grown under the right
conditions, we could create a never-ending bank of cells. There are
well-established methods for taking immature blood stem cells and
growing them under specific stimuli so that they will differentiate to
form (ultimately) red blood cells. Essentially, it should be possible to
create a huge bank of different types of red blood cells, so that we can
always have matching blood for patients, be these from the battlefield
or a traffic accident.

The generation of iPS cells has been one of those rare events in biology
that have not just changed a field, but have almost reinvented it.
Shinya Yamanaka is considered by most to be a dead cert to share a Nobel
Prize with John Gurdon in the near future, and it would be difficult to
over-estimate the technological impact of the work. But even though the
achievement is extraordinary, nature already does so much more, so much
faster.

When a sperm and an egg fuse, the two nuclei are reprogrammed by the
cytoplasm of the egg. The sperm nucleus, in particular, very quickly
loses most of the molecular memory of what it was and becomes an almost
blank canvas. It’s this reprogramming phenomenon that was exploited by
John Gurdon, and by Ian Wilmut and Keith Campbell, when they inserted
adult nuclei into the cytoplasm of eggs and created new clones.

When an egg and sperm fuse, the reprogramming process is incredibly
efficient and is all over within 36 hours. When Shinya Yamanaka first
created iPS cells only a miniscule number, a fraction far less than 1
per cent of the cells in the best experiment, were reprogrammed. It
literally took weeks for the first reprogrammed iPS cells to grow. A lot
of progress has been made in improving the percentage efficiency and
speed of reprogramming adult cells into iPS cells, but it still doesn’t
come within spitting range of what happens during normal fertilisation.
Why not?

The answer is epigenetics. Differentiated cells are epigenetically
modified in specific ways, at a molecular level. This is why skin
fibroblasts will normally always remain as skin fibroblasts and not turn
into cardiomyocytes, for example. When differentiated cells are
reprogrammed to become pluripotent cells – whether by somatic cell
nuclear transfer or by the use of the four Yamanaka factors – the
differentiation-specific epigenetic signature must be removed so that
the nucleus becomes more like that of a newly fertilised zygote.

The cytoplasm of an egg is incredibly efficient at reversing the
epigenetic memory on our genes, acting as a giant molecular eraser. This
is what it does very rapidly when the egg and sperm nuclei fuse to form
a zygote. Artificial reprogramming to create iPS cells is more like
watching a six-year-old doing their homework – they are forever rubbing
out the wrong bit whilst leaving in the mis-spelt words, and then
tearing a hole in the page because they rub too vigorously. Although we
are starting to get a handle on some of the processes involved, we are a
long way from recreating in the lab what happens naturally.

Until now we have been talking about epigenetics at the phenomenon
scale. The time has come to move into the molecules that underlie all
the remarkable events we’ve talked about so far, and many more besides.

  Chapter 3

 

  Life As We Knew It

 

  A poet can survive everything but a misprint.

  Oscar Wilde

 

If we are going to understand epigenetics, we first need to understand a
bit about genetics and genes. The basic code for pretty much all
independent life on earth, from bacteria to elephants, from Japanese
knotweed to humans, is DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid). The phrase ‘DNA’ has
become an expression in its own right with increasingly vague meanings.
Social commentators may refer to the DNA of a society or of a
corporation, by which they mean the real core of values behind an
organisation. There’s even been a perfume called after it. The iconic
scientific image of the mid-20th century was the atomic mushroom cloud.
The double helix of DNA had similar cachet in the later part of the same
century.

Science is just as prone to mood swings and fashions as any other human
activity. There was a period when the prevailing orthodoxy seemed to be
that the only thing that mattered was our DNA script, our genetic
inheritance. Chapters 1 and 2 showed that this can’t be the case, as the
same script is used differently depending on its cellular context. The
field is now possibly at risk of swinging a bit too far in the opposite
direction, with hardline epigeneticists almost minimizing the
significance of the DNA code. The truth is, of course, somewhere in
between.

In the Introduction, we described DNA as a script. In the theatre, if a
script is lousy then even a wonderful director and a terrific cast won’t
be able to create a great production. On the other hand, we have
probably all suffered through terrible productions of our favourite
plays. Even if the script is perfect, the final outcome can be awful if
the interpretation is poor. In the same way, genetics and epigenetics
work intimately together to create the miracles that are us and every
organic thing around us.

DNA is the fundamental information source in our cells, their basic
blueprint. DNA itself isn’t the real business end of things, in the
sense that it doesn’t carry out all the thousands of activities required
just to keep us alive. That job is mainly performed by the proteins.
It’s proteins that carry oxygen around our bloodstream, that turn chips
and burgers into sugars and other nutrients that can be absorbed from
our guts and used to power our brains, that contract our muscles so we
can turn the pages of this book. But DNA is what carries the codes for
all these proteins.

If DNA is a code, then it must contain symbols that can be read. It must
act like a language. This is indeed exactly what the DNA code does. It
might seem odd when we think how complicated we humans are, but our DNA
is a language with only four letters. These letters are known as bases,
and their full names are adenine, cytosine, guanine and thymine. They
are abbreviated to A, C, G and T. It’s worth remembering C, cytosine, in
particular, because this is the most important of all the bases in
epigenetics.

One of the easiest ways to visualise DNA mentally is as a zip. It’s not
a perfect analogy, but it will get us started. Of course, one of the
most obvious things that we know about a zip is that it is formed of two
strips facing each other. This is also true of DNA. The four bases of
DNA are the teeth on the zip. The bases on each side of the zip can link
up to each other chemically and hold the zip together. Two bases facing
each other and joined up like this are known as a base-pair. The fabric
strips that the teeth are stitched on to on a zip are the DNA backbones.
There are always two backbones facing each other, like the two sides of
the zip, and DNA is therefore referred to as double-stranded. The two
sides of the zip are basically twisted around to form a spiral structure
– the famous double helix. Figure 3.1 is a stylised representation of
what the DNA double helix looks like.

[DNAHelix.eps]

 

Figure 3.1 A schematic representation of DNA. The two backbones are
twisted around each other to form a double helix. The helix is held
together by chemical bonds between the bases in the centre of the
molecule.

 

The analogy will only get us so far, however, and that’s because the
teeth of the DNA zip aren’t all equivalent. If one of the teeth is an
A base, it can only link up with a T base on the opposite strand.
Similarly, if there is a G base on one strand, it can only link up with
a C on the other one. This is known as the base-pairing principle. If an
A tried to link with a C on the opposite strand it would throw the whole
shape of the DNA out of kilter, a bit like a faulty tooth on a zip.

Keeping it pure

 

The base-pairing principle is incredibly important in terms of DNA
function. During development, and even during a lot of adult life, the
cells of our bodies divide. They do this so that organs can get bigger
as a baby matures, for example. They also grow to replace cells that die
off quite naturally. An example of this is the production by the bone
marrow of white blood cells, produced to replace those that are lost in
our bodies’ constant battles with infectious micro-organisms. The
majority of cell types reproduce by first copying their entire DNA, and
then dividing it equally between two daughter cells. This DNA
replication is essential. Without it, daughter cells could end up with
no DNA, which in most cases would render them completely useless, like a
computer that’s lost its operating software.

It’s the copying of DNA before each cell division that shows why the
base-pairing principle is so important. Hundreds of scientists have
spent their entire careers working out the details of how DNA gets
faithfully copied. Here’s the gist of it. The two strands of DNA are
pulled apart and then the huge number of proteins involved in the
copying (known as the replication complex) get to work.

Figure 3.2 shows in principle what happens. The replication complex
moves along each single strand of DNA, and builds up a new strand facing
it. The complex recognises a specific base – base C for example – and
always puts a G in the opposite position on the strand that it’s
building. That’s why the base-pairing principle is so important. Because
C has to pair up with G, and A has to pair up with T, the cells can use
the existing DNA as a template to make the new strands. Each daughter
cell ends up with a new perfect copy of the DNA, in which one of the
strands came from the original DNA molecule and the other was newly
synthesised.

[Fig-2.eps]

 

Figure 3.2 The first stage in replication of DNA is the separation of
the two strands of the double helix. The bases on each separated
backbone act as the template for the creation of a new strand. This
ensures that the two new double-stranded DNA molecules have exactly the
same base sequence as the parent molecule. Each new double helix of DNA
has one backbone that was originally part of the parent molecule (in
black) and one freshly synthesised backbone (in white).

 

Even in nature, in a system which has evolved over billions of years,
nothing is perfect and occasionally the replication machinery makes a
mistake. It might try to insert a T where a C should really go. When
this happens the error is almost always repaired very quickly by another
set of proteins that can recognise that this has happened, take out the
wrong base and put in the right one. This is the DNA repair machinery,
and one of the reasons it’s able to act is because when the wrong bases
pair up, it recognises that the DNA ‘zip’ isn’t done up properly.

The cell puts a huge amount of energy into keeping the DNA copies
completely faithful to the original template. This makes sense if we go
back to our model of DNA as a script. Consider one of the most famous
lines in all of English literature:

  O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?

If we insert just one extra letter, then no matter how well the line is
delivered on stage, its effect is unlikely to be the one intended by the
Bard:

  O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore fart thou Romeo?

This puerile example illustrates why a script needs to be
reproduced faithfully. It can be the same with our DNA – one
inappropriate change (a mutation) can have devastating effects. This is
particularly true if the mutation is present in an egg or a sperm, as
this can ultimately lead to the birth of an individual in whom all the
cells carry the mutation. Some mutations have devastating clinical
effects. These range from children who age so prematurely that a
ten-year-old has the body of a person of 70, to women who are pretty
much predestined to develop aggressive and difficult to treat breast
cancer before they are 40 years of age. Thankfully, these sorts of
genetic mutations and conditions are relatively rare compared with the
types of diseases that afflict most people.

The 50,000,000,000,000 or so cells in a human body are all the result of
perfect replication of DNA, time after time after time, whenever cells
divide after the formation of that single-cell zygote from Chapter 1.
This is all the more impressive when we realise just how much DNA has to
be reproduced each time one cell divides to form two daughter cells.
Each cell contains six billion base-pairs of DNA (half originally came
from your father and half from your mother). This sequence of six
billion base-pairs is what we call the genome. So every single cell
division in the human body was the result of copying 6,000,000,000 bases
of DNA. Using the same type of calculation as in Chapter 1, if we count
one base-pair every second without stopping, it would take a mere 190
years to count all the bases in the genome of a cell. When we consider
that a baby is born just nine months after the creation of the
single-celled zygote, we can see that our cells must be able to
replicate DNA really fast.

The three billion base-pairs we inherit from each parent aren’t formed
of one long string of DNA. They are arranged into smaller bundles, which
are the chromosomes. We’ll delve deeper into these in Chapter 9.

Reading the script

 

Let’s go back to the more fundamental question of what these six billion
base-pairs of DNA actually do, and how the script works. More
specifically how can a code that only has four letters (A, C, G and T)
create the thousands and thousands of different proteins found in our
cells? The answer is surprisingly elegant. It could be described as the
modular paradigm of molecular biology but it’s probably far more useful
to think of it as Lego.

Lego used to have a great advertising slogan ‘It’s a new toy every day’,
and it was very accurate. A large box of Lego contains a limited number
of designs, essentially a fairly small range of bricks of certain
shapes, sizes and colours. Yet it’s possible to use these bricks to
create models of everything from ducks to houses, and from planes to
hippos. Proteins are rather like that. The ‘bricks’ in proteins are
quite small molecules called amino acids, and there are twenty standard
amino acids (different Lego bricks) in our cells. But these twenty amino
acids can be joined together in an incredible array of combinations of
all sorts of diversity and length, to create an enormous number of
proteins.

That still leaves the problem of how even as few as twenty amino acids
can be encoded by just four bases in DNA. The way this works is that the
cell machinery ‘reads’ DNA in blocks of three base-pairs at a time. Each
block of three is known as a codon and may be AAA, or GCG or any other
combination of A, C, G and T. From just four bases it’s possible to
create sixty-four different codons, more than enough for the twenty
amino acids. Some amino acids are coded for by more than one codon. For
example, the amino acid called lysine is coded for by AAA and AAG. A few
codons don’t code for amino acids at all. Instead they act as signals to
tell the cellular machinery that it’s at the end of a protein-coding
sequence. These are referred to as stop codons.

How exactly does the DNA in our chromosomes act as a script for
producing proteins? It does it through an intermediary protein, a
molecule called messenger RNA (mRNA). mRNA is very like DNA although it
does differ in a few significant details. Its backbone is slightly
different from DNA (hence RNA, which stands for ribonucleic acid rather
than deoxyribonucleic acid); it is single-stranded (only one backbone);
it replaces the T base with a very similar but slightly different one
called U (we don’t need to go into the reason it does this here). When a
particular DNA stretch is ‘read’ so that a protein can be produced using
that bit of script, a huge complex of proteins unzips the right piece of
DNA and makes mRNA copies. The complex uses the base-pairing principle
to make perfect mRNA copies. The mRNA molecules are then used as
temporary templates at specialised structures in the cell that produce
protein. These read the three letter codon code and stitch together the
right amino acids to form the longer protein chains. There is of course
a lot more to it than all this, but that’s probably sufficient detail.

An analogy from everyday life may be useful here. The process of moving
from DNA to mRNA to protein is a bit like controlling an image from a
digital photograph. Let’s say we take a photograph on a digital camera
of the most amazing thing in the world. We want other people to have
access to the image, but we don’t want them to be able to change the
original in any way. The raw data file from the camera is like the DNA
blueprint. We copy it into another format, that can’t be changed very
much – a PDF maybe – and then we email out thousands of copies of this
PDF, to everyone who asks for it. The PDF is the messenger RNA. If
people want to, they can print paper copies from this PDF, as many as
they want, and these paper copies are the proteins. So everyone in the
world can print the image, but there is only one original file.

Why so complicated, why not just have a direct mechanism? There are a
number of good reasons that evolution has favoured this indirect method.
One of them is to prevent damage to the script, the original image file.
When DNA is unzipped it is relatively susceptible to damage and that’s
something that cells have evolved to avoid. The indirect way in which
DNA codes for proteins minimises the period of time for which a
particular stretch of DNA is open and vulnerable. The other reason this
indirect method has been favoured by evolution is that it allows a lot
of control over the amount of a specific protein that’s produced, and
this creates flexibility.

Consider the protein called alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH). This is
produced in the liver and breaks down alcohol. If we drink a lot of
alcohol, the cells of our livers will increase the amounts of ADH they
produce. If we don’t drink for a while, the liver will produce less of
this protein. This is one of the reasons why people who drink frequently
are better able to tolerate the immediate effects of alcohol than those
who rarely drink, who will become tipsy very quickly on just a couple of
glasses of wine. The more often we drink alcohol, the more ADH protein
our livers produce (up to a limit). The cells of the liver don’t do this
by increasing the number of copies of the ADH gene. They do this by
reading the ADH gene more efficiently, i.e. producing more mRNA copies
and/or by using these mRNA copies more efficiently as protein templates.

As we shall see, epigenetics is one of the mechanisms a cell uses to
control the amount of a particular protein that is produced, especially
by controlling how many mRNA copies are made from the original template.

The last few paragraphs have all been about how genes encode proteins.
How many genes are there in our cells? This seems like a simple question
but oddly enough there is no agreed figure on this. This is because
scientists can’t agree on how to define a gene. It used to be quite
straightforward – a gene was a stretch of DNA that encoded a protein. We
now know that this is far too simplistic. However, it’s certainly true
to say that all proteins are encoded by genes, even if not all genes
encode proteins. There are about 20,000 to 24,000 protein-encoding genes
in our DNA, a much lower estimate than the 100,000 that scientists
thought was a good guess just ten years ago1.

Editing the script

 

Most genes in human cells have quite a similar structure. There’s a
region at the beginning called the promoter, which binds the protein
complexes that copy the DNA to form mRNA. The protein complexes move
along through what’s known as the body of the gene, making a long mRNA
strand, until they finally fall off at the end of the gene.

Imagine a gene body that is 3,000 base-pairs long, a perfectly sensible
length for a gene. The mRNA will also be 3,000 base-pairs long. Each
amino acid is encoded by a codon composed of three bases, so we would
predict that this mRNA will encode a protein that is 1,000 amino acids
long. But, perhaps unexpectedly, what we find is that the protein is
usually considerably shorter than this.

If the sequence of a gene is typed out it looks like a long string of
combinations of the letters A, C, G and T. But if we analyse this with
the right software, we find that we can divide that long string into two
types of sequences. The first type is called an exon (for expressed
sequence) and an exon can code for a run of amino acids. The second type
is called an intron (for inexpressed sequence). This doesn’t code for a
run of amino acids. Instead it contains lots of the ‘stop’ codons that
signal that the protein should come to an end.

When the mRNA is first copied from the DNA it contains the whole run of
exons and introns. Once this long RNA molecule has been created, another
multi-sub-unit protein complex comes along. It removes all the intron
sequences and then joins up the exons to create an mRNA that codes for a
continuous run of amino acids. This editing process is called splicing.

This again seems extremely complicated, but there’s a very good reason
that this complex mechanism has been favoured by evolution. It’s because
it enables a cell to use a relatively small number of genes to create a
much bigger number of proteins. The way this works is shown in Figure
3.3.

[Fig-3.eps]

 

Figure 3.3 The DNA molecule is shown at the very top of this diagram.
The exons, which code for stretches of amino acids, are shown in the
dark boxes. The introns, which don’t code for amino acid sequences, are
represented by the white boxes. When the DNA is first copied into RNA,
indicated by the first arrow, the RNA contains both the exons and the
introns. The cellular machinery then removes some or all of the introns
(the process known as splicing). The final messenger RNA molecules can
thereby code for a variety of proteins from the same gene, as
represented by the various words shown in the diagram. For simplicity,
all the introns and exons have been drawn as the same size, but in
reality they can vary widely.

 

The initial mRNA contains all the exons and all the introns. Then it’s
spliced to remove the introns. But during this splicing some of the
exons may also be removed. Some exons will be retained in the final
mRNA, others will be skipped over. The various proteins that this
creates may have quite similar functions, or they may differ
dramatically. The cell can express different proteins depending on what
that cell has to do at a particular time, or because of different
signals that it receives. If we define a gene as something that encodes
a protein, this mechanism means that just 20,000 or so genes can code
for far more than just 20,000 proteins.

Whenever we describe the genome we talk about it in very two-dimensional
terms, almost like a railway track. Peter Fraser’s laboratory at the
Babraham Institute outside Cambridge has published some extraordinary
work showing it’s probably nothing like this at all. He works on the
genes that code for the proteins required to make haemoglobin, the
pigment in red blood cells that carries oxygen all around the body.
There are a number of different proteins needed to create the final
pigment, and they lie on different chromosomes. Doctor Fraser has shown
that in cells that produce large amounts of haemoglobin, these
chromosome regions become floppy and loop out like tentacles sticking
out of the body of an octopus. These floppy regions mingle together in a
small area of the cell nucleus, waving about until they can find each
other. By doing this, there is an increased chance that all the proteins
needed to create the functional haemoglobin pigment will be expressed
together at the same time2.

Each cell in our body contains 6,000,000,000 base-pairs. About
120,000,000 of these code for proteins. One hundred and twenty million
sounds like a lot, but it’s actually only 2 per cent of the total
amount. So although we think of proteins as being the most important
things our cells produce, about 98 per cent of our genome doesn’t code
for protein.

Until recently, the reason that we have so much DNA when so little of it
leads to a protein was a complete mystery. In the last ten years we’ve
finally started to get a grip on this, and once again it’s connected
with regulating gene expression through epigenetic mechanisms. It’s now
time to move on to the molecular biology of epigenetics.

  Chapter 4

 

  Life As We Know It Now

 

  The important thing in science is not so much to obtain new facts as
  to discover new ways of thinking about them.

  Sir William Bragg

 

So far this book has focused mainly on outcomes, the things that we can
observe that tell us that epigenetic events happen. But every biological
phenomenon has a physical basis and that’s what this chapter is about.
The epigenetic outcomes we’ve described are all a result of variations
in expression of genes. The cells of the retina express a different set
of genes from the cells in the bladder, for example. But how do the
different cell types switch different sets of genes on or off?

The specialised cell types in the retina and in the bladder are each at
the bottom of one of the troughs in Waddington’s epigenetic landscape.
The work of both John Gurdon and Shinya Yamanaka showed us that whatever
mechanism cells use for staying in these troughs, it’s not anything to
do with changing the DNA blueprint of the cell. That remains intact and
unchanged. Therefore keeping specific sets of genes turned on or off
must happen through some other mechanism, one that can be maintained for
a really long time. We know this must be the case because some cells,
like the neurons in our brains, are remarkably long-lived. The neurons
in the brain of an 85-year-old person, for example, are about 85 years
of age. They formed when the individual was very young, and then stayed
the same for the rest of their life.

But other cells are different. The top layer of skin cells, the
epidermis, is replaced about every five weeks, from constantly dividing
stem cells in the deeper layers of that tissue. These stem cells always
produce new skin cells, and not, for example, muscle cells. Therefore
the system that keeps certain sets of genes switched on or off must also
be a mechanism that can be passed on from parent cell to daughter cell
every time there is a cell division.

This creates a paradox. Researchers have known since the work of Oswald
Avery and colleagues in the mid-1940s that DNA is the material in cells
that carries our genetic information. If the DNA stays the same in
different cell types in one individual, how can the incredibly precise
patterns of gene expression be transmitted down through the generations
of cell division?

Our analogy of actors reading a script is again useful. Baz Luhrmann
hands Leonardo DiCaprio Shakespeare’s script for Romeo and Juliet, on
which the director has written or typed various notes – directions,
camera placements and lots of additional technical information. Whenever
Leo’s copy of the script is photocopied, Baz Luhrmann’s additional
information is copied along with it. Claire Danes also has the script
for Romeo and Juliet. The notes on her copy are different from those on
her co-star’s, but will also survive photocopying. That’s how epigenetic
regulation of gene expression occurs – different cells have the same DNA
blueprint (the original author’s script) but carrying varied molecular
modifications (the shooting script) which can be transmitted from mother
cell to daughter cell during cell division.

These modifications to DNA don’t change the essential nature of the A,
C, G and T alphabet of our genetic script, our blueprint. When a gene is
switched on and copied to make mRNA, that mRNA has exactly the same
sequence, controlled by the base-pairing rules, irrespective of whether
or not the gene is carrying an epigenetic addition. Similarly, when the
DNA is copied to form new chromosomes for cell division, the same A, C,
G and T sequences are copied.

Since epigenetic modifications don’t change what a gene codes for, what
do they do? Basically, they can dramatically change how well a gene is
expressed, or if it is expressed at all. Epigenetic modifications can
also be passed on when a cell divides, so this provides a mechanism for
how control of gene expression stays consistent from mother cell to
daughter cell. That’s why skin stem cells only give rise to more skin
cells, not to any other cell type.

Sticking a grape on DNA

 

The first epigenetic modification to be identified was DNA methylation.
Methylation means the addition of a methyl group to another chemical, in
this case DNA. A methyl group is very small. It’s just one carbon atom
linked to three hydrogen atoms. Chemists describe atoms and molecules by
their ‘molecular weight’, where the atom of each element has a different
weight. The average molecular weight of a base-pair is around 600 Da
(the Da stands for Daltons, the unit that is used for molecular weight).
A methyl group only weighs 15 Da. By adding a methyl group the weight of
the base-pair is only increased by 2.5 per cent. A bit like sticking a
grape on a tennis ball.

Figure 4.1 shows what DNA methylation looks like chemically.

[Fig-4.eps]

 

Figure 4.1 The chemical structures of the DNA base cytosine and its
epigenetically modified form, 5-methylcytosine. C: carbon; H: hydrogen;
N: nitrogen; O: oxygen. For simplicity, some carbon atoms have not been
explicitly shown, but are present where there is a junction of two
lines.

 

The base shown is C – cytosine. It’s the only one of the four DNA bases
that gets methylated, to form 5-methylcytosine. The ‘5’ refers to the
position on the ring where the methyl is added, not to the number of
methyl groups; there’s always only one of these. This methylation
reaction is carried out in our cells, and those of most other organisms,
by one of three enzymes called DNMT1, DNMT3A or DNMT3B. DNMT stands for
DNA methyltransferase. The DNMTs are examples of epigenetic ‘writers’ –
enzymes that create the epigenetic code. Most of the time these enzymes
will only add a methyl group to a C that is followed by a G. C followed
by G is known as CpG.

This CpG methylation is an epigenetic modification, which is also known
as an epigenetic mark. The chemical group is ‘stuck onto’ DNA but
doesn’t actually alter the underlying genetic sequence. The C has been
decorated rather than changed. Given that the modification is so small,
it’s perhaps surprising that it will come up over and over again in this
book, and in any discussion of epigenetics. This is because methylation
of DNA has profound effects on how genes are expressed, and ultimately
on cellular, tissue and whole-body functions.

In the early 1980s it was shown that if you injected DNA into mammalian
cells, the amount of methylation on the injected DNA affected how well
it was transcribed into RNA. The more methylated the injected DNA was,
the less transcription that occurred1. In other words, high levels of
DNA methylation were associated with genes that were switched off.
However, it wasn’t clear how significant this was for the genes normally
found in the nuclei of cells, rather than ones that were injected into
cells.

The key work in establishing the importance of methylation in mammalian
cells came out of the laboratory of Adrian Bird, who has spent most of
his scientific career in Edinburgh, Conrad Waddington’s old stomping
ground. Professor Bird is a Fellow of the Royal Society and a former
Governor of the Wellcome Trust, the enormously influential independent
funding agency in UK science. He is one of those traditional British
scientific types – understated, soft-spoken, non-flashy and drily funny.
His lack of self-promotion is in contrast to his stellar international
reputation, where he is widely acknowledged as the godfather of DNA
methylation and its role in controlling gene expression.

In 1985 Adrian Bird published a key paper in Cell showing that most CpG
motifs were not randomly distributed throughout the genome. Instead the
majority of CpG pairs were concentrated just upstream of certain genes,
in the promoter region2. Promoters are the stretches of the genome where
the DNA transcription complexes bind and start copying DNA to form RNA.
Regions where there is a high concentration of CpG motifs are called CpG
islands.

In about 60 per cent of the genes that code for proteins, the promoters
lie within CpG islands. When these genes are active, the levels of
methylation in the CpG island are low. The CpG islands tend to be highly
methylated only when the genes are switched off. Different cell types
express different genes, so unsurprisingly the patterns of CpG island
methylation are also different across different cell types.

For quite some time there was considerable debate about what this
association meant. It was the old cause or effect debate. One
interpretation was that DNA methylation was essentially a historical
modification – genes were repressed by some unknown mechanism and then
the DNA became methylated. In this model, DNA methylation was just a
downstream consequence of gene repression. The other interpretation was
that the CpG island became methylated, and it was this methylation that
switched the gene off. In this model the epigenetic modification
actually causes the change in gene expression. Although there is still
the occasional argument about this between competing labs, the vast
majority of scientists in this field now believe that the data generated
in the quarter of a century since Adrian Bird’s paper are consistent
with the second, causal model. Under most circumstances, methylation of
the CpG island at the start of a gene turns that gene off.

Adrian Bird went on to investigate how DNA methylation switches genes
off. He showed that when DNA is methylated, it binds a protein called
MeCP2 (Methyl CpG binding protein 2)3. However, this protein won’t bind
to unmethylated CpG motifs, which is pretty amazing when we look back at
Figure 4.1 and think how similar the methylated and unmethylated forms
of cytosine really are. The enzymes that add the methyl group to DNA
have been described as writers of the epigenetic code. MeCP2 doesn’t add
any modifications to DNA. Its role is to enable the cell to interpret
the modifications on a DNA region. MeCP2 is an example of a ‘reader’ of
the epigenetic code.

Once MeCP2 binds to 5-methylcytosine in a gene promoter it seems to do a
number of things. It attracts other proteins that also help to switch
the gene off4. It may also stop the DNA transcription machinery from
binding to the gene promoter, and this prevents mRNA messenger molecule
from being produced5. Where genes and their promoters are very heavily
methylated, binding of MeCP2 seems to be part of a process where that
region of a chromosome gets shut down almost permanently. The DNA
becomes incredibly tightly coiled up and the gene transcription
machinery can’t get access to the base-pairs to make mRNA copies.

This is one of the reasons why DNA methylation is so important. Remember
those 85 year old neurons in the brains of senior citizens? For over
eight decades DNA methylation has kept certain regions of the genome
incredibly tightly compacted and so the neuron has kept certain genes
completely repressed. This is why our brain cells never produce
haemoglobin, for example, or digestive enzymes.

But what about the other situation, the example of skin stem cells
dividing very frequently but always just creating new skin cells, rather
than some other cell type such as bone? In this situation, the pattern
of DNA methylation is passed from mother cell to daughter cells. When
the two strands of the DNA double helix separate, each gets copied using
the base-pairing principle, as we saw in Chapter 3. Figure 4.2
illustrates what happens when this replication occurs in a region where
the CpG is methylated on the C.

[Fig-5.eps]

 

Figure 4.2 This schematic shows how DNA methylation patterns can be
preserved when DNA is replicated. The methyl group is represented by the
black circle. Following separation of the parent DNA double helix in
step 1, and replication of the DNA strands in step 2, the new strands
are ‘checked’ by the DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) enzyme. DNMT1 can
recognise that a methyl group at a cytosine motif on one strand of a DNA
molecule is not matched on the newly synthesised strand. DNMT1 transfers
a methyl group to the cytosine on the new strand (step 3). This only
occurs where a C and a G are next to each other in a CpG motif. This
process ensures that the DNA methylation patterns are maintained
following DNA replication and cell division.

 

DNMT1 can recognise if a CpG motif is only methylated on one strand.
When DNMT1 detects this imbalance, it replaces the ‘missing’ methylation
on the newly copied strand. The daughter cells will therefore end up
with the same DNA methylation patterns as the parent cell. As a
consequence, they will repress the same genes as the parent cell and the
skin cells will stay as skin cells.

Miracle mice on YouTube

 

Epigenetics has a tendency to crop up in places where scientists really
aren’t expecting it. One of the most interesting examples of this in
recent years has related to MeCP2, the protein that reads the DNA
methylation mark. Several years ago, the now discredited theory of the
MMR vaccine causing autism was at its height, and getting lots of
coverage in the general media. One very respected UK broadsheet
newspaper covered in depth the terribly sad story of a little girl. As a
baby she initially met all the usual developmental milestones. Shortly
after receiving an MMR jab not long before her first birthday she began
to deteriorate rapidly, losing most of the skills she had gained. By the
time the journalist wrote the article, the little girl was about four
years old and was described as having the most severely autistic
symptoms the author had ever seen. She had not developed language,
appeared to have very severe learning difficulties and her actions were
very limited and repetitive, with very few purposeful hand actions (she
no longer reached out for food, for example). Development of this
incredibly severe disability was undoubtedly a tragedy for her and for
her family.

But if a reader with any sort of background in neurogenetics read this
article, two things probably struck them immediately. The first was that
it’s very unusual – not unheard of but pretty uncommon – for girls to
present with such severe autism. This is much more common in boys. The
second thing that would have struck them was that this case sounded
exactly the same as a rare genetic disorder called Rett syndrome, right
down to the normal early development and the timing and types of
symptoms. It’s just coincidence that the symptoms of Rett syndrome, and
indeed of most types of autism, first start becoming obvious at around
the same age as when infants are typically given the MMR vaccination.

But what does this have to do with epigenetics? In 1999, a group led by
the eminent neurogeneticist Huda Zoghbi at the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute in Maryland showed that the majority of cases of Rett syndrome
are caused by mutations in MeCP2, the gene which encodes the reader of
methylated DNA. The children with this disorder have a mutation in the
MeCP2 gene which means that they don’t produce a functional MeCP2
protein. Although their cells are perfectly capable of methylating DNA
correctly, the cells can’t read this part of the epigenetic code
properly.

The severe clinical symptoms of children with the MeCP2 mutation tell us
that reading the epigenetic code properly is very important. But they
also tell us other things. Not all the tissues of girls with Rett
syndrome are equally affected, so perhaps this particular epigenetic
pathway is more important in some tissues than others. Because the girls
develop severe mental retardation, we can deduce that having the right
amount of normal MeCP2 protein is really important in the brain. Given
that these children seem to be fairly unaffected in other tissues such
as liver or kidney, perhaps MeCP2 activity isn’t as important in these
tissues. It could be that DNA methylation itself isn’t so critical in
these organs, or maybe these tissues contain other proteins in addition
to MeCP2 that can read this part of the epigenetic code.

Long-term, scientists, physicians and families of children with Rett
syndrome would dearly love to be able to use our increased understanding
of the disease to help us find better treatments. This is a huge
challenge, as we would be trying to intervene in a condition that
affects the brain as a result of a gene mutation that is present
throughout development, and beyond.

One of the most debilitating aspects of Rett syndrome is the profound
mental retardation that is an almost universal symptom. Nobody knew if
it would be possible to reverse a neurodevelopmental problem such as
mental retardation once it had become established, but the general
feeling about this wasn’t optimistic. Adrian Bird remains a major figure
in our story. In 2007 he published an astonishing paper in Science, in
which he and his colleagues showed that Rett syndrome could be reversed,
in a mouse model of the disease.

Adrian Bird and his colleagues created a cloned strain of mice in which
the Mecp2 gene was inactivated. They used the types of technologies
pioneered by Rudolf Jaenisch. These mice developed severe neurological
symptoms, and as adults they exhibited hardly any normal mouse
activities. If you put a normal mouse in the middle of a big white box,
it will almost immediately begin to explore its surroundings. It will
move around a lot, it will tend to follow the edges of the box just like
a normal house mouse scurrying along by the skirting boards, and it will
frequently rear up on its back legs to get a better view. A mouse with
the Mecp2 mutation does very few of these things – put it in the middle
of a big white box and it will tend to stay there.

When Adrian Bird created his mouse strain with the Mecp2 mutation, he
also engineered it so that the mice would also be carrying a normal copy
of Mecp2. However, this normal copy was silent – it wasn’t switched on
in the mouse cells. The really clever bit of this experiment was that if
the mice were given a specific harmless chemical, the normal Mecp2 gene
became activated. This allowed the experimenters to let the mice develop
and grow up with no Mecp2 in their cells, and then at a time of the
scientists’ choosing, the Mecp2 gene could be switched on.

The results of switching on the Mecp2 gene were extraordinary. Mice
which previously just sat in the middle of the white box suddenly turned
into the curious explorers that mice should be6. You can find clips of
this on YouTube, along with interviews with Adrian Bird where he
basically concedes that he really never expected to see anything so
dramatic7.

The reason this experiment is so important is that it offers hope that
we may be able to find new treatments for really complex neurological
conditions. Prior to the publication of this Science paper, there had
been an assumption that once a complex neurological condition has
developed, it is impossible to reverse it. This was especially presumed
to be the case for any condition that arises developmentally, i.e. in
the womb or in early infancy. This is a critical period when the
mammalian brain is making so many of the connections and structures that
are used throughout the rest of life. The results from the Mecp2 mutant
mice suggest that in Rett syndrome, maybe all the bits of cellular
machinery that are required for normal neurological function are still
there in the brain – they just need to be activated properly. If this
holds true for humans (and at a brain level we aren’t really that
different from mice) this offers hope that maybe we can start to develop
therapies to reverse conditions as complex as mental retardation. We
can’t do this the way it was done in the mouse, as that was a genetic
approach that can only be used in experimental animals and not in
humans, but it suggests that it is worth trying to develop suitable
drugs that have a similar effect.

DNA methylation is clearly really important. Defects in reading DNA
methylation can lead to a complex and devastating neurological disorder
that leaves children with Rett syndrome severely disabled throughout
their lives. DNA methylation is also essential for maintaining the
correct patterns of gene expression in different cell types, either for
several decades in the case of our long-lived neurons, or in all
daughters of a stem cell in a constantly-replaced tissue such as skin.

But we still have a conceptual problem. Neurons are very different from
skin cells. If both cells types use DNA methylation to switch off
certain genes, and to keep them switched off, they must be using the
methylation at different sets of genes. Otherwise they would all be
expressing the same genes, to the same extent, and they would inevitably
then be the same types of cells instead of being neurons and skin cells.

The solution to how two cell types can use the same mechanism to create
such different outcomes lies in how DNA methylation gets targeted to
different regions of the genome in different cell types. This takes us
into the second great area of molecular epigenetics. Proteins.

DNA has a friend

 

DNA is often described as if it’s a naked molecule, i.e. DNA and nothing
else. If we visualise it at all in our minds, a DNA double helix
probably looks like a very long twisty railway track. This is pretty
much how we described it in the previous chapter. But in reality it’s
actually nothing like that, and many of the great breakthroughs in
epigenetics came about when scientists began to appreciate this fully.

DNA is intimately associated with proteins, and in particular with
proteins called histones. At the moment most attention in epigenetics
and gene regulation is focused on four particular histone proteins
called H2A, H2B, H3 and H4. These histones have a structure known as
‘globular’, as they are folded into compact ball-like shapes. However,
each also has a loose floppy chain of amino acids that sticks out of the
ball, which is called the histone tail. Two copies of each of these four
histone proteins come together to form a tight structure called the
histone octamer (so called because it’s formed of eight individual
histones).

It might be easiest to think of this octamer as eight ping-pong balls
stacked on top of each other in two layers. DNA coils tightly around
this protein stack like a long liquorice whip around marshmallows, to
form a structure called the nucleosome. One hundred and forty seven
base-pairs of DNA coil around each nucleosome. Figure 4.3 is a very
simplified representation of the structure of a nucleosome, where the
white strand is DNA and the grey wiggles are the histone tails.

[Fig-6.eps]

 

Figure 4.3 The histone octamer (2 molecules each of histones H2A, H2B,
H3 and H4) stacked tightly together, and with DNA wrapped around it,
forms the basic unit of chromatin called the nucleosome.

 

If we had read anything about histones even just fifteen years ago, they
would probably have been described as ‘packaging proteins’, and left at
that. It’s certainly true that DNA has to be packaged. The nucleus of a
cell is usually only about 10 microns in diameter – that’s 1/100th of a
millimetre – and if the DNA in a cell was just left all floppy and loose
it could stretch for 2 metres. The DNA is curled tightly around the
histone octamers and these are all stacked closely on top of each other.

Certain regions of our chromosomes have an extreme form of that sort of
structure almost all the time. These tend to be regions that don’t
really code for any genes. Instead, they are structural regions such as
the very ends of chromosomes, or areas that are important for separating
chromosomes after DNA has been duplicated for cell division.

The regions of DNA that are really heavily methylated also have this
hyper-condensed structure and the methylation is very important in
establishing this configuration. It’s one of the mechanisms used to keep
certain genes switched off for decades in long-lived cell types such as
neurons.

But what about those regions that aren’t screwed down tight, where there
are genes that are switched on or have the potential to be switched on?
This is where the histones really come into play. There is so much more
to histones than just acting as a molecular reel for wrapping DNA
around. If DNA methylation represents the semi-permanent additional
notes on our script of Romeo and Juliet, histone modifications are the
more tentative additions. They may be like pencil marks, that survive a
few rounds of photocopying but eventually fade out. They may be even
more transient, like Post-It notes, used very temporarily.

A substantial number of the breakthroughs in this field have come from
the lab of Professor David Allis at Rockefeller University in New York.
He’s a trim, neat, clean-shaven American who looks much younger than his
60 years and is exceptionally popular amongst his peers. Like many
epigeneticists, he began his career in the field of developmental
biology. Just like Adrian Bird, and John Gurdon before him, David Allis
wears his stellar reputation in epigenetics very lightly. In a
remarkable flurry of papers in 1996, he and his colleagues showed that
histone proteins were chemically modified in cells, and that this
modification increased expression of genes near a specific modified
nucleosome8.

The histone modification that David Allis identified was called
acetylation. This is the addition of a chemical group called an acetyl,
in this case to a specific amino acid named lysine on the floppy tail of
one of the histones. Figure 4.4 shows the structures of lysine and
acetyl-lysine, and we can again see that the modification is relatively
small. Like DNA methylation, lysine acetylation is an epigenetic
mechanism for altering gene expression which doesn’t change the
underlying gene sequence.

[Fig-7.eps]

 

Figure 4.4 The chemical structures of the amino acid lysine and its
epigenetically modified form, acetyl-lysine. C: carbon; H: hydrogen; N:
nitrogen; O: oxygen. For simplicity, some carbon atoms have not been
explicitly shown, but are present where there is a junction of two
lines.

 

So back in 1996 there was a nice simple story. DNA methylation turned
genes off and histone acetylation turned genes on. But gene expression
is much more subtle than genes being either on or off. Gene expression
is rarely an on-off toggle switch; it’s much more like the volume dial
on a traditional radio. So perhaps it was unsurprising that there turned
out to be more than one histone modification. In fact, more than 50
different epigenetic modifications to histone proteins have been
identified since David Allis’s initial work, both by him and by a large
number of other laboratories9. These modifications all alter gene
expression but not always in the same way. Some histone modifications
push gene expression up, others drive it down. The pattern of
modifications is referred to as a histone code10. The problem that
epigeneticists face is that this is a code that is extraordinarily
difficult to read.

Imagine a chromosome as the trunk of a very big Christmas tree. The
branches sticking out all over the tree are the histone tails and these
can be decorated with epigenetic modifications. We pick up the purple
baubles and we put one, two or three purple baubles on some of the
branches. We also have green icicle decorations and we can put either
one or two of these on some branches, some of which already have purple
baubles on them. Then we pick up the red stars but are told we can’t put
these on a branch if the adjacent branch has any purple baubles. The
gold snowflakes and green icicles can’t be present on the same branch.
And so it goes on, with increasingly complex rules and patterns.
Eventually, we’ve used all our decorations and we wind the lights around
the tree. The bulbs represent individual genes. By a magical piece of
software programming, the brightness of each bulb is determined by the
precise conformation of the decorations surrounding it. The likelihood
is that we would really struggle to predict the brightness of most of
the bulbs because the pattern of Christmas decorations is so
complicated.

That’s where scientists currently are in terms of predicting how all the
various histone modification combinations work together to influence
gene expression. It’s reasonably clear in many cases what individual
modifications can do, but it’s not yet possible to make accurate
predictions from complex combinations.

There are major efforts being made to learn how to understand this code,
with multiple labs throughout the world collaborating or competing in
the use of the fastest and most complex technologies to address this
problem. The reason for this is that although we may not be able to read
the code properly yet, we know enough about it to understand that it’s
extremely important.

Build a better mousetrap

 

Some of the key evidence comes from developmental biology, the field
from which so many great epigenetic investigators have emerged. As we
have already described, the single-celled zygote divides, and very
quickly daughter cells start to take on discrete functions. The first
noticeable event is that the cells of the early embryo split into the
inner cell mass (ICM) and the trophoectoderm. The ICM cells in
particular start to differentiate to form an increasing number of
different cell types. This rolling of the cells down the epigenetic
landscape is, to quite a large degree, a self-perpetuating system.

The key concept to grasp at this stage is the way that waves of gene
expression and epigenetic modifications follow on from each other. A
useful analogy for this is the game of Mousetrap, first produced in the
early 1960s and still on sale today. Players have to build an insanely
complex mouse trap during the course of the game. The trap is activated
at one end by the simple act of releasing a ball. This ball passes down
and through all sorts of contraptions including a slide, a kicking boot,
a flight of steps and a man jumping off a diving board. As long as the
pieces have been put together properly, the whole ridiculous cascade
operates perfectly, and the toy mice get caught under a net. If one of
the pieces is just slightly mis-aligned, the crazy sequence judders to a
halt and the trap doesn’t work.

The developing embryo is like Mousetrap. The zygote is pre-loaded with
certain proteins, mainly from the egg cytoplasm. These egg-derived
proteins move into the nucleus and bind to target genes, which we’ll
call Boots (in honour of Mousetrap), and regulate their expression. They
also attract a select few epigenetic enzymes to the Boots genes. These
epigenetic enzymes may also have been ‘donated’ from the egg cytoplasm
and they set up longer-lasting modifications to the DNA and histone
proteins of chromatin, also influencing how these Boots genes are
switched on or off. The Boots proteins bind to the Divers genes, and
switch these on. Some of these Divers genes may themselves encode
epigenetic enzymes, which will form complexes on members of the Slides
family of genes, and so on. The genetic and epigenetic proteins work
together in a seamless orderly procession, just like the events in
Mousetrap once the ball has been released. Sometimes a cell will express
a little more or a little less of a key factor, one whose expression is
on a finely balanced threshold. This has the potential to alter the
developmental path that the cell takes, as if twenty Mousetrap games had
been connected up. Slight deviations in how the pieces were fitted
together, or how the ball rolled at critical moments, would trigger one
trap and not another.

The names in our analogy are made up, but we can apply this to a real
example. One of the key proteins in the very earliest stages of
embryonic development is Oct4. Oct4 protein binds to certain key genes,
and also attracts a specific epigenetic enzyme. This enzyme modifies the
chromatin and alters the regulation of that gene. Both Oct4 and the
epigenetic enzyme with which it works are essential for development of
the early embryo. If either is absent, the zygote can’t even develop as
far as creating an ICM.

The patterns of gene expression in the early embryo eventually feed back
on themselves. When certain proteins are expressed, they can bind to the
Oct4 promoter and switch off expression of this gene. Under normal
circumstances, somatic cells just don’t express Oct4. It would be too
dangerous for them to do so because Oct4 could disrupt the normal
patterns of gene expression in differentiated cells, and make them more
like stem cells.

This is exactly what Shinya Yamanaka did when he used Oct4 as a
reprogramming factor. By artificially creating very high levels of Oct4
in differentiated cells, he was able to ‘fool’ the cells into acting
like early developmental cells. Even the epigenetic modifications were
reset – that’s how powerful this gene is.

Normal development has yielded important evidence of the significance of
epigenetic modifications in controlling cell fate. Cases where
development goes awry have also shown us how important epigenetics can
be.

For example, a 2010 publication in Nature Genetics identified the
mutations that cause a rare disease called Kabuki syndrome. Kabuki
syndrome is a complex developmental disorder with a range of symptoms
that include mental retardation, short stature, facial abnormalities and
cleft palate. The paper showed that Kabuki syndrome is caused by
mutations in a gene called MLL211. The MLL2 protein is an epigenetic
writer that adds methyl groups to a specific lysine amino acid at
position 4 on histone H3. Patients with this mutation are unable to
write their epigenetic code properly, and this leads to their symptoms.

Human diseases can also be caused by mutations in enzymes that remove
epigenetic modifications, i.e. ‘erasers’ of the epigenetic code.
Mutations in a gene called PHF8, which removes methyl groups from a
lysine at position 20 on histone H3, cause a syndrome of mental
retardation and cleft palate12. In these cases, the patient’s cells put
epigenetic modifications on without problems, but don’t remove them
properly.

It’s interesting that although the MLL2 and PHF8 proteins have different
roles, the clinical symptoms caused by mutations in these genes have
overlaps in their presentation. Both lead to cleft palate and mental
retardation. Both of these symptoms are classically considered as
reflecting problems during development. Epigenetic pathways are
important throughout life, but seem to be particularly significant
during development.

In addition to these histone writers and erasers there are over 100
proteins that act as ‘readers’ of this histone code by binding to
epigenetic marks. These readers attract other proteins and build up
complexes that switch on or turn off gene expression. This is similar to
the way that MeCP2 helps turn off expression of genes that are carrying
DNA methylation.

Histone modifications are different to DNA methylation in a very
important way. DNA methylation is a very stable epigenetic change. Once
a DNA region has become methylated it will tend to stay methylated under
most conditions. That’s why this epigenetic modification is so important
for keeping neurons as neurons, and why there are no teeth in our
eyeballs. Although DNA methylation can be removed in cells, this is
usually only under very specific circumstances and it’s quite unusual
for this to happen.

Most histone modifications are much more plastic than this. A specific
modification can be put on a histone at a particular gene, removed and
then later put back on again. This happens in response to all sorts of
stimuli from outside the cell nucleus. The stimuli can vary enormously.
In some cell types the histone code may change in response to hormones.
These include insulin signalling to our muscle cells, or oestrogen
affecting the cells of the breast during the menstrual cycle. In the
brain the histone code can change in response to addictive drugs such as
cocaine, whereas in the cells lining the gut, the pattern of epigenetic
modifications will alter depending on the amounts of fatty acids
produced by the bacteria in our intestines. These changes in the histone
code are one of the key ways in which nurture (the environment)
interacts with nature (our genes) to create the complexity of every
higher organism on earth.

Histone modifications also allow cells to ‘try out’ particular patterns
of gene expression, especially during development. Genes become
temporarily inactivated when repressive histone modifications (those
which drive gene expression down) are established on the histones near
those genes. If there is an advantage to the cell in those genes being
switched off, the histone modifications may last long enough to lead to
DNA methylation. The histone modifications attract reader proteins that
build up complexes of other proteins on the nucleosome. In some cases
the complexes may include DNMT3A or DNMT3B, two of the enzymes that
deposit methyl groups on CpG DNA motifs. Under these circumstances, the
DNMT3A or 3B can ‘reach across’ from the complex on the histone and
methylate the adjacent DNA. If enough DNA methylation takes place,
expression of the gene will shut down. In extreme circumstances the
whole chromosome region may become hyper-compacted and inactivated for
multiple cell divisions, or for decades in a non-dividing cell like a
neuron.

Why have organisms evolved such complex patterns of histone
modifications to regulate gene expression? The systems seem particularly
complex when you contrast them with the fairly all-or-nothing effects of
DNA methylation. One of the reasons is probably because the complexity
allows sophisticated fine-tuning of gene expression. Because of this,
cells and organisms can adapt their gene expression appropriately in
response to changes in their environment, such as availability of
nutrients or exposure to viruses. But as we shall see in the next
chapter, this fine-tuning can result in some very strange consequences
indeed.

  Chapter 5

 

  Why Aren’t Identical Twins Actually Identical?

 

  There are two things in life for which we are never prepared: twins.

  Josh Billings

 

Identical twins have been a source of fascination in human cultures for
millennia, and this fascination continues right into the present day.
Just taking Western European literature as one source, we can find the
identical twins Menaechmus and Sosicles in a work of Plautus from around
200 B.C.; the re-working of the same story by Shakespeare in The Comedy
of Errors, written around 1590; Tweedledum and Tweedledee in Lewis
Carroll’s Through the Looking-Glass, and What Alice Found There written
in 1871; right up to the Weasley twins in the Harry Potter novels of
J. K. Rowling. There is something inherently intriguing about two people
who seem exactly the same as one another.

But there is something that interests all of us even more than the
extraordinary similarities of identical twins, and that is when we can
see their differences. It’s a device that’s been repeatedly used in the
arts, from Frederic and Hugo in Jean Anhouil’s Ring around the Moon to
Beverley and Elliott Mantle in David Cronenberg’s Dead Ringers. Taking
this to its extreme you could even cite Dr Jekyll and his alter ego Mr
Hyde, the ultimate ‘evil twin’. The differences between identical twins
have certainly captured the imaginations of creative people from all
branches of the arts, but they have also completely captivated the world
of science.

The scientific term for identical twins is monozygotic (MZ) twins. They
were both derived from the same single-cell zygote formed from the
fusion of one egg and one sperm. In the case of MZ twins the inner cell
mass of the blastocyst split into two during the early cell divisions,
like slicing a doughnut in half, and gave rise to two embryos. And these
embryos are genetically identical.

This splitting of the inner cell mass to form two separate embryos is
generally considered a random event. This is consistent with the
frequency of MZ twins being pretty much the same throughout all human
populations, and with the fact that identical twins don’t run in
families. We tend to think of MZ twins as being very rare but this isn’t
really the case. About one in every 250 full-term pregnancies results in
the birth of a pair of MZ twins, and there are around ten million pairs
of identical twins around the world today.

MZ twins are particularly fascinating because they help us to determine
the degree to which genetics is the driving force for life events such
as particular illnesses. They basically allow us to explore
mathematically the link between the sequences of our genes (genotype)
and what we are like (phenotype), be this in terms of height, health,
freckles or anything else we would like to measure. This is done by
calculating how often both twins in a pair present with the same
disease. The technical term for this is the concordance rate.

Achondroplasia, a relatively common form of short-limbed dwarfism, is an
example of a condition in which MZ twins are almost invariably affected
in the same way. If one twin has achondroplasia, so does the other one.
The disease is said to show 100 per cent concordance. This isn’t
surprising as achondroplasia is caused by a specific genetic mutation.
Assuming that the mutation was present in either the egg or the sperm
that fused to form the zygote, all the daughter cells that form the
inner cell mass and ultimately the two embryos will also carry the
mutation.

However, relatively few conditions show 100 per cent concordance, as the
majority of illnesses are not caused by one overwhelming mutation in a
key gene. This creates the problem of how to determine if genetics plays
a role, and if so, how great this role is. This is where twin studies
have become so valuable. If we study large groups of MZ twins we can
determine what percentage of them is concordant or discordant for a
particular condition. If one twin has a disease, does the other twin
also tend to develop it as well?

Figure 5.1 is a graph showing concordance rates for schizophrenia. This
shows that the more closely related we are to someone with this disease,
the more likely we are to develop it ourselves. The most important parts
of the graph to look at are the two bars at the bottom, which deal with
twins. From this we can compare the concordance rates for identical and
non-identical (fraternal) twins. Non-identical twins share the same
developmental environment (the uterus) but genetically are no more
similar than any other pair of siblings, as they arose from two separate
zygotes as a consequence of the fertilisation of two eggs. The
comparison between the two types of twins is important because generally
speaking, the twins in a pair (whether identical or non-identical) are
likely to have shared pretty similar environments. If schizophrenia was
caused mainly by environmental factors, we would expect the concordance
rates for the disease to be fairly similar between identical and
non-identical twins. Instead, what we see is that in non-identical
twins, if one twin develops schizophrenia, the other twin has a 17 per
cent chance of doing the same. But in MZ twins this risk jumps to nearly
50 per cent. The almost three-fold higher risk for identical versus
non-identical twins tells us that there is a major genetic component to
schizophrenia.

[Fig-8.eps]

 

Figure 5.1 The concordance rates for schizophrenia. The more genetically
related two individuals are, the more likely it is that if one
individual has the disease, their relative will also develop the
disorder. However, even in genetically identical monozygotic twins, the
concordance rate for schizophrenia does not reach 100 per cent. Data
taken from The Surgeon General’s Report on Mental Health
http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/mentalhealth/chapter4/sec4_1.html#etiology

 

Similar studies have shown that there is also a substantial genetic
component to a significant number of other human disorders, including
multiple sclerosis, bipolar disorder, systemic lupus erythematosus and
asthma. This has been really useful in understanding the importance of
genetic susceptibility to complex diseases.

But in many ways, it’s the other side of the question that is more
interesting. It’s not the MZ twins who both develop a specific disease
who are most interesting. It’s the MZ twins who end up with very
different outcomes – one a paranoid schizophrenic, one mentally very
healthy, for example – who create the most intriguing scientific
problem. Why do two genetically identical individuals, who in many cases
have experienced very similar environments, have such variable
phenotypes? Similarly, why is it quite rare for both MZ twins in a pair
to develop type 1 diabetes? What is it, in addition to the genetic code,
that governs these health outcomes?

How epigenetics drives a wedge between twins

 

One possible explanation would be that quite randomly the twin with
schizophrenia had spontaneously developed mutations in genes in certain
cells, for example in the brain. This could happen if the DNA
replication machinery had malfunctioned at some point during brain
development. These changes might increase his or her susceptibility to a
disorder. This is theoretically possible, but scientists have failed to
find much data to support this theory.

Of course, the standard answer has always been that discordancy between
the twins is due to differences in their environments. Sometimes this is
clearly true. If we were monitoring longevity, for example, one twin
getting knocked over and killed by a number 47 bus would certainly
represent an environmental difference. But this is an extreme scenario.
Many twins share a fairly similar environment, especially in early
development. Even so, it is certainly possible that there are multiple
subtle environmental differences that may be hard to monitor
appropriately.

But if we invoke the environment as the other important factor in
development of disease, this raises another problem. It still leaves the
question of how the environment does this. Somehow the environmental
stimuli – be these compounds in our food, chemicals in cigarette smoke,
UV rays in sunlight, pollutants from car exhausts or any of the
thousands of molecules and radiation sources that we’re exposed to every
day – must impact on our genes and cause a change in expression.

The majority of non-infectious diseases that afflict most people take a
long time to develop, and then remain as a problem for many years if
there is no cure available. The stimuli from the environment could
theoretically be acting on the genes all the time in the cells that are
acting abnormally, leading to disease. But this seems unlikely,
especially because most of the chronic diseases probably involve the
interaction of multiple stimuli with multiple genes. It’s hard to
imagine that all these stimuli would be present for decades at a time.
The alternative is that there is a mechanism that keeps the
disease-associated cells in an abnormal state, i.e. expressing genes
inappropriately.

In the absence of any substantial evidence for a role for somatic
mutation, epigenetics seems like a strong candidate for this mechanism.
This would allow the genes in one twin to stay mis-regulated, ultimately
leading to a disease. We’re only at the beginning of the investigation
but some evidence has started accumulating that suggests this may indeed
be the case.

One of the most straightforward experiments conceptually, is to analyse
if chromatin modification patterns (the epigenome) change as MZ twins
get older. In the simplest case, we wouldn’t even need to investigate
this in the context of disease. We could start by testing a much simpler
hypothesis – that genetically identical individuals become
epigenetically non-identical as they age. If this hypothesis is correct,
this would support the idea that MZ twins can vary from each other at
the epigenetic level. This in turn would strengthen our confidence in
moving forwards to examining the role of epigenetic changes in disease.

In 2005, a large collaborative group headed by Professor Manel Esteller,
then at the Spanish National Cancer Centre in Madrid, published a paper
in which they examined this issue1. They made some interesting
discoveries. If they examined chromatin from infant MZ twin pairs, they
couldn’t see much difference in the levels of DNA methylation or of
histone acetylation between the two twins. When they looked at pairs of
MZ twins who were much older, such as in their fifties, there was a lot
of variation within the pair for the amount of DNA methylation or
histone acetylation. This seemed to be particularly true of twins that
had lived apart for a long time.

The results from this study were consistent with a model where
genetically identical twins start out epigenetically very similar, and
then diverge as they get older. The older MZ twins who had led separate
and different lives for the longest would be expected to be the ones who
had encountered the greatest differences in their environments. The
finding that these were precisely the twin pairs who were most different
epigenetically was consistent with the idea that the epigenome (the
overall pattern of epigenetic modifications on the genome) reflects
environmental differences.

Children who eat breakfast are statistically more likely to do well at
school than children who skip breakfast. This doesn’t necessarily mean
that learning can be improved by a bowl of cornflakes. It may simply be
that children who eat breakfast are more likely to be children whose
parents make an effort to get them to school every day, on time, and
help them with their studies. Similarly, Professor Esteller’s data are
correlative. They show there is a relationship between the ages of twins
and how different they are epigenetically, but they don’t prove that age
has caused the change in the epigenome. But at least the hypothesis can
remain in play.

A team led by Dr Jeffrey Craig in 2010 at the Royal Children’s Hospital
in Melbourne also examined DNA methylation in identical and fraternal
twin pairs2. They investigated a few relatively small regions of the
genome in greater detail than in Manel Esteller’s earlier paper. Using
samples just from newborn twin pairs, they showed that there was a
substantial amount of difference between the DNA methylation patterns of
fraternal twins. This isn’t unexpected, since fraternal twins are
genetically non-identical and we expect different individuals to have
different epigenomes. Interestingly, though, they also found that even
the MZ twins differed in their DNA methylation patterns, suggesting
identical twins begin to diverge epigenetically during development in
the uterus. Combining the information from the two papers, and from
additional studies, we can conclude that even genetically identical
individuals are epigenetically distinct by the time of birth, and these
epigenetic differences become more pronounced with age and exposure to
different environments.

Of mice and men (and women)

 

These data are consistent with a model where epigenetic changes could
account for at least some of the reasons why MZ twins aren’t
phenotypically identical, but there’s still a lot of supposition
involved. That’s because for many purposes humans are a quite hopeless
experimental system. If we want to be able to assess the role of
epigenetics in the problem of why genetically identical individuals are
phenotypically different from one another, we would like to be able to
do the following:

1.  Analyse hundreds of identical individuals, not just pairs of them;
2.  Manipulate their environments, in completely controlled ways;
3.  Transfer embryos or babies from one mother to another, to
    investigate the effects of early nurture;
4.  Take all sorts of samples from the different tissues of the body, at
    lots of different time points;
5.  Control who mates with whom;
6.  Carry out studies on four or five generations of genetically
    identical individuals.

Needless to say, this isn’t feasible for humans.

This is why experimental animals have been so useful in epigenetics.
They allow scientists to address really complex questions, whilst
controlling the environment as much as possible. The data that are
generated in these animal studies produce insights from which we can
then try to infer things about humans.

The match may not be perfect, but we can unravel a surprising amount of
fundamental biology this way. Various comparative studies have shown
that many systems have stayed broadly the same in different organisms
over almost inconceivably long periods. The epigenetic machinery of
yeast and humans, for example, share more similarities than differences
and yet the common ancestor for the two species lies about one billion
years in the past3. So, epigenetic processes are clearly fairly
fundamental things, and using model systems can at least point us in a
helpful direction for understanding the human condition.

In terms of the specific question we’ve been looking at in this chapter
– why genetically identical twins often don’t seem to be identical – the
animal that has been most useful is our close mammalian relative, the
mouse. The mouse and human lineages separated a mere 75 million or so
years ago4. 99 per cent of the genes found in mice can also be detected
in humans, although they aren’t generally absolutely identical between
the two species.

Scientists have been able to create strains of mice in which all the
individuals are genetically identical to each other. These have been
incredibly useful for investigating the roles of non-genetic factors in
creating variation between individuals. Instead of just two genetically
identical individuals, it’s possible to create hundreds, or thousands.
The way this is done would have made even the Ptolemy dynasty of ancient
Egypt blush. Scientists mate a pair of mice who are brother and sister.
Then they mate a brother and sister from the resulting litter. They then
mate a brother and sister from their litter and so on. When this is
repeated for over twenty generations of brother-sister matings, all the
genetic variation gets bred out, throughout the genome. All mice of the
same sex from the strain are genetically identical. In a refinement of
this, scientists can take these genetically identical mice and introduce
just one change into their DNA. They may use such genetic engineering to
create mice which are identical except for just one region of DNA that
the experimenters are most interested in.

A mouse of a different colour

 

The most useful mouse model for exploring how epigenetic changes can
lead to phenotypic differences between genetically identical individuals
is called the agouti mouse. Normal mice have hair which is banded in
colour. The hair is black at the tip, yellow in the middle and black
again at the base. A gene called agouti is essential for creating the
yellow bit in the middle, and is switched on as part of a normal
cyclical mechanism in mice.

There is a mutated version of the agouti gene (called a) which never
switches on. Mice that only have the a, mutant version of agouti have
hair which is completely black. There is also a particular mutant mouse
strain called Avy, which stands for agouti viable yellow. In Avy mice,
the agouti gene is switched on permanently and the hair is yellow
through its entire length. Mice have two copies of the agouti gene, one
inherited from the mother and one from the father. The Avy version of
the gene is dominant to the a version, which means that if one copy of
the gene is Avy and one is a, the Avy will ‘overrule’ a and the hairs
will be yellow throughout their length. This is all summarised in Figure
5.2.

[Fig-9.eps]

 

Figure 5.2 Hair colour in mice is affected by the expression of the
agouti gene. In normal mice, the agouti protein is expressed cyclically,
leading to the characteristic brindled pattern of mouse fur. Disruption
of this cyclical pattern of expression can lead to hairs which are
either yellow or black throughout their length.

 

Scientists created a strain of mice that contained one copy of Avy and
one copy of a in every cell. The nomenclature for this is Avy/a. Since
Avy is dominant to a, you would predict that the mice would have
completely yellow hair. Since all the mice in the strain are genetically
identical, you would expect that they would all look the same. But they
don’t. Some have the very yellow fur, some the classic mouse appearance
caused by the banded fur, and some are all shades in-between, as shown
in Figure 5.3.

[AgoutiMice.tif]

 

Figure 5.3 Genetically identical mice showing the extent to which fur
colour can vary, depending on expression of the agouti protein. Photo
reproduced with the kind permission of Professor Emma Whitelaw.

 

This is really odd, since the mice are all genetically exactly the same.
All the mice have the same DNA code. We could argue that perhaps the
differences in coat colour are due to environment, but laboratory
conditions are so standardised that this seems unlikely. It’s also
unlikely because these differences can be seen in mice from the same
litter. We would expect mice from a single litter to have very similar
environments indeed.

Of course, the beauty of working with mice, and especially with highly
inbred strains, is that it’s relatively easy to perform detailed genetic
and epigenetic studies, especially when we already have a reasonable
idea of where to look. In this case, the region to examine was the
agouti gene.

Mouse geneticists knew how the yellow phenotype was caused in Avy yellow
mice. A piece of DNA had been inserted in the mouse chromosome just
before the agouti gene. This piece of DNA is called a retrotransposon,
and it’s one of those DNA sequences that doesn’t code for a protein.
Instead, it codes for an abnormal piece of RNA. Expression of this RNA
messes up the usual control of the downstream agouti gene and keeps the
gene switched on continuously. This is why the hairs on the Avy mice are
yellow rather than banded.

That still doesn’t answer the question of why genetically identical
Avy/a mice had variable coat colour. The answer to this has been shown
to be due to epigenetics. In some Avy/a mice the CpG sequences in the
retrotransposon DNA have become very heavily methylated. As we saw in
the previous chapter, DNA methylation of this kind switches off gene
expression. The retrotransposon no longer expressed the abnormal RNA
that messed up transcription from the agouti gene. These mice were the
ones with fairly normal banded mouse coat colour. On other genetically
identical Avy mice, the retrotransposon was unmethylated. It produced
its troublesome RNA which messed up the transcription from the agouti
gene so that it was switched on continuously and the mice were yellow.
Mice with in-between levels of retrotransposon methylation had
in-between levels of yellow fur. This model is shown in Figure 5.4.

[Fig-10.eps]

 

Figure 5.4 Variations in DNA methylation (represented by black circles)
influence expression of a retrotransposon. The variation in expression
of the retrotransposon in turn affects expression of the agouti gene,
leading to coat colour variability between genetically identical
animals.

 

Here, DNA methylation is effectively working like a dimmer switch. When
the retrotransposon is unmethylated, it shines to its fullest extent,
producing lots of the abnormal RNA. The more the retrotranposon is
methylated, the more its expression gets turned down.

The agouti mouse has provided a quite clear-cut example of how
epigenetic modification, in this case DNA methylation, can make
genetically identical individuals look phenotypically different.
However, there is always the fear that agouti is a special case, and
maybe this is a very uncommon mechanism. This is particularly of concern
because it’s proved very difficult to find an agouti gene in humans – it
seems to be in that 1 per cent of genes we don’t share with our mouse
neighbours.

There is another interesting condition found in mice, in which the tail
is kinked. This is called Axin-fused and it also demonstrates extreme
variability between genetically identical individuals. This has been
shown to be another example where the variability is caused by differing
levels of DNA methylation in a retrotransposon in different animals,
just like the agouti mouse.

This is encouraging as it suggests this mechanism isn’t a one off, but
kinked tails still don’t really represent a phenotype that is of much
concern to the average human. But there’s something we can all get on
board with: body weight. Genetically identical mice don’t all have the
same body weight.

No matter how tightly scientists control the environment for the mice,
and especially their access to food, identical mice from inbred mouse
strains don’t all have exactly the same body weight. Experiments carried
out over many years have shown that only about 20–30 per cent of the
variation in body weights can be attributed to the post-natal
environment. This leaves the question of what causes the other 70–80 per
cent of variation in body weight5. Since it isn’t being caused by
genetics (all the mice are identical) or by the environment, there has
to be another source for the variation.

In 2010, Professor Emma Whitelaw, the terrifically enthusiastic and
intensely rigorous mouse geneticist working at the Queensland Institute
of Medical Research, published a fascinating paper. She used an inbred
strain of mice and then used genetic engineering to create subsets of
animals which were genetically identical to the starting stock, except
that they only expressed half of the normal levels of a particular
epigenetic protein. She performed the genetic engineering independently
in a number of mice, so that she could create separate groups of
animals, each of which was mutated in a different gene coding for
epigenetic proteins.

When Professor Whitelaw analysed the body weights of large numbers of
the normal or mutated mice, an interesting effect appeared. In a group
of normal inbred mice, most of the animals had relatively similar body
weights, within the ranges found in many other studies. In the mice with
low levels of a certain epigenetic protein, there was a lot more
variability in the body weights within the group. Further experiments
published in the same paper assessed the effects of the decreased
expression of these epigenetic proteins. Their decreased expression was
linked to changes in expression levels of selected genes involved in
metabolism6, and increased variability in that expression. In other
words, the epigenetic proteins were exerting some control over the
expression of other genes, just as we might expect.

Emma Whitelaw tested a number of epigenetic proteins in her system, and
found that only a few of them caused the increased variation in body
weight. One of the proteins that had this effect was Dnmt3a. This is one
of the enzymes that transfers methyl groups to DNA, to switch genes off.
The other epigenetic protein that caused increased variability in body
weight was called Trim28. Trim28 forms a complex with a number of other
epigenetic proteins which together add specific modifications to
histones. These modifications down-regulate expression of genes near the
modified histones and are known as repressive histone modifications or
marks. Regions of the genome that have lots of repressive marks on their
histones tend to become methylated on their DNA, so the Trim28 may be
important for creating the right environment for DNA methylation.

These experiments suggested that certain epigenetic proteins act as a
kind of dampening field. ‘Naked’ DNA is rather prone to being switched
on somewhat randomly, and the overall effect is like having a lot of
background chatter in our cells. This is called transcriptional noise.
The epigenetic proteins act to turn down the volume of this random chat.
They do this by covering the histones with modifications that reduce the
genes’ expression. It’s likely that different epigenetic proteins are
important for suppressing different genes in some tissues rather than in
others.

It’s clear that this suppression isn’t total. If it were, then all
inbred mice would be identical in every aspect of their phenotype and we
know this isn’t the case. There is variation in body weight even in the
inbred strains, it’s just that there’s even more variation in the mice
with the depressed levels of the epigenetic proteins.

This sophisticated balancing act, in which epigenetic proteins dampen
down transcriptional noise but don’t entirely repress gene expression,
is a cellular compromise. It leaves cells with enough flexibility of
gene expression to be able to respond to new signals – be these hormones
or nutrients, pollutants or sunlight – but without the genes being
constantly ready to fire up just for the heck of it. Epigenetics allows
cells to perform the difficult compromise between becoming (and
remaining) different cell types with a variety of functions, and not
being so locked into a single pattern of gene expression that they
become incapable of responding to changes in their environment.

Something that is becoming increasingly clear is that early development
is a key period when this control of transcriptional noise first becomes
established. After all, very little of the variation in body weight in
the original inbred strains could be attributed to the post-natal
environment (just 20–30 per cent). Interest is increasing all the time
in the role of a phenomenon called developmental programming, whereby
events during foetal development can impact on the whole of adult life,
and it is increasingly recognised that epigenetic mechanisms are what
underlie a major proportion of this programming.

Such a model is entirely consistent with Emma Whitelaw’s work on the
effects of decreased levels of Dnmt3a or Trim28 in her mouse studies.
The body weight effects were apparent when the mice were just three
weeks old. This model is also consistent with the fact that decreased
levels of Dnmt3a resulted in the increased variability in body weight,
but decreased levels of the related enzyme Dnmt1 had no effect in Emma
Whitelaw’s experiments. Dnmt3a can add methyl groups to totally
unmethylated DNA regions, which means it is responsible for establishing
the correct DNA methylation patterns in cells. Dnmt1 is the protein that
maintains pre-established methylation patterns on DNA. It seems that the
most important feature for dampening down gene expression variability
(at least as far as body weight is concerned) is establishing the
correct DNA methylation patterns in the first place.

The Dutch Hunger Winter

 

Scientists and policy-makers have recognised for many years the
importance of good maternal health and nutrition during pregnancy, to
increase the chances that babies will be born at a healthy weight and so
be more likely to thrive physically. In more recent years, it’s become
increasingly clear that if a mother is malnourished during pregnancy,
her child may be at increased risk of ill-health, not just during the
immediate post-birth infancy, but for decades. We’ve only recently begun
to realise that this is at least in part due to molecular epigenetic
effects, which result in impaired developmental programming and
life-long defects in gene expression and cellular function.

As already highlighted, there are extremely powerful ethical and
logistical reasons why humans are a difficult species to use
experimentally. Tragically, historical events, terrible at the time,
conspire to create human scientific study groups by accident. One of the
most famous examples of this is the Dutch Hunger Winter, which was
mentioned in the Introduction.

This was a period of terrible hardship and near-starvation during the
Nazi fuel and food blockade of the Netherlands in the last winter of the
Second World War. Twenty-two thousand people died and the desperate
population ate anything they could find, from tulip bulbs to animal
blood. The dreadful privations of the population created a remarkable
scientific study population. The Dutch survivors were a well-defined
group of individuals all of whom suffered just one period of
malnutrition, all of them at exactly the same time.

One of the first aspects to be studied was the effect of the famine on
the birthweights of children who had been in the womb during the famine.
If a mother was well-fed around the time of conception and malnourished
only for the last few months of the pregnancy, her baby was likely to be
born small. If, on the other hand, the mother suffered malnutrition for
the first three months of the pregnancy only (because the baby was
conceived towards the end of this terrible episode), but then was
well-fed, she was likely to have a baby with normal body weight. The
foetus ‘caught up’ in body weight, because foetuses do most of their
growing in the last few months of pregnancy.

But here’s the thing – epidemiologists were able to study these groups
of babies for decades and what they found was really surprising. The
babies who were born small stayed small all their lives, with lower
obesity rates than the general population. Even more unexpectedly, the
adults whose mothers had been malnourished only early in their pregnancy
had higher obesity rates than normal. Recent reports have shown a
greater incidence of other health problems as well, including certain
aspects of mental health. If mothers suffered severe malnutrition during
the early stages of pregnancy, their children were more likely than
usual to develop schizophrenia. This has been found not just in the
Dutch Hunger Winter cohort but also in the survivors of the monstrous
Great Chinese Famine of 1958 to 1961, in which millions starved to death
as a result of Mao Tse Tung’s policies.

Even though these individuals had seemed perfectly healthy at birth,
something that had happened during their development in the womb
affected them for decades afterwards. And it wasn’t just the fact that
something had happened that mattered, it was when it happened. Events
that take place in the first three months of development, a stage when
the foetus is really very small, can affect an individual for the rest
of their life.

This is completely consistent with the model of developmental
programming, and the epigenetic basis to this. In the early stages of
pregnancy, where different cell types are developing, epigenetic
proteins are probably vital for stabilising gene expression patterns.
But remember that our cells contain thousands of genes, spread over
billions of base-pairs, and we have hundreds of epigenetic proteins.
Even in normal development there are likely to be slight variations in
the expression of some of these proteins, and the precise effects that
they have at specific chromosomal regions. A little bit more DNA
methylation here, a little bit less there.

The epigenetic machinery reinforces and then maintains particular
patterns of modifications, thus creating the levels of gene expression.
Consequently, these initial small fluctuations in histone and DNA
modifications may eventually become ‘set’ and get transmitted to
daughter cells, or be maintained in long-lived cells such as neurons,
that can last for decades. Because the epigenome gets ‘stuck’, so too
may the patterns of gene expression in certain chromosomal regions. In
the short term the consequences of this may be relatively minor. But
over decades all these mild abnormalities in gene expression, resulting
from a slightly inappropriate set of chromatin modifications, may lead
to a gradually increasing functional impairment. Clinically, we don’t
recognise this until it passes some invisible threshold and the patient
begins to show symptoms.

The epigenetic variation that occurs in developmental programming is at
heart a predominantly random process, normally referred to as
‘stochastic’. This stochastic process may account for a significant
amount of the variability that develops between the MZ twins who opened
this chapter. Random fluctuations in epigenetic modifications during
early development lead to non-identical patterns of gene expression.
These become epigenetically set and exaggerated over the years, until
eventually the genetically identical twins become phenotypically
different, sometimes in the most dramatic of ways. Such a random
process, caused by individually minor fluctuations in the expression of
epigenetic genes during early development also provides a very good
model for understanding how genetically identical Avy/a mice can end up
with different coat colours. This can be caused by randomly varying
levels of DNA methylation of the Avy retrotransposon.

Such stochastic changes in the epigenome are the likely reason why even
in a totally inbred mouse strain, kept under completely standardised
conditions, there is variation in body weight. But once a big
environmental stimulus is introduced in addition to this stochastic
variation, the variability can become even more pronounced.

A major metabolic disturbance during early pregnancy, such as the
dramatically decreased availability of food during the Dutch Hunger
Winter, would significantly alter the epigenetic processes occurring in
the foetal cells. The cells would change metabolically, in an attempt to
keep the foetus growing as healthily as possible despite the decreased
nutrient supply. The cells would change their gene expression to
compensate for the poor nutrition, and the patterns of expression would
be set for the future because of epigenetic modifications to the genes.
It’s probably no surprise that it was the children whose mothers had
been malnourished during the very early stages of pregnancy, when
developmental programming is at its peak, who went on to be at higher
risk of adult obesity. Their cells had become epigenetically programmed
to make the most of limited food supply. This programming remained in
place even when the environmental condition that had prompted it –
famine – was long over.

Recent studies examining DNA methylation patterns in the Dutch Hunger
Winter survivors have shown changes at key genes involved in metabolism.
Although a correlation like this doesn’t prove cause-and-effect, the
data are consistent with under-nutrition during the early developmental
period changing the epigenomic profile of key metabolic genes7.

It’s important to recognise that even in the Dutch Hunger Winter cohort,
the effects that we see are not all-or-nothing. Not every individual
whose mother had been malnourished early in pregnancy became obese. When
scientists studied the population they found an increased likelihood of
adult obesity. This is again consistent with a model where random
epigenetic variability, the genotypes of the individuals and early
environmental events, and the responses of the genes and cells to the
environment combine in one great big complicated – and as yet not easily
decipherable – equation.

Severe malnutrition is not the only factor that has effects on a foetus
that can last a lifetime. Excessive alcohol consumption during pregnancy
is a leading preventable cause of birth defects and mental retardation
(foetal alcohol syndrome) in the Western world8. Emma Whitelaw used the
agouti mouse to investigate if alcohol can alter the epigenetic
modifications in a mouse model of foetal alcohol syndrome. As we have
seen, expression of the Avy gene is epigenetically controlled via DNA
methylation of a retrotransposon. Any stimulus that alters DNA
methylation of the retrotransposon would change expression of the Avy
gene. This would affect the colour of the fur. In this model, fur colour
becomes a ‘read-out’ that indicates changes in epigenetic modifications.

Pregnant mice were given free access to alcohol. The coat colour in the
pups from the alcohol-drinking mothers was compared with the coat colour
of the pups from pregnant mice that didn’t have access to booze. The
distribution of coat colours was different between the two groups. So
were the levels of DNA methylation of the retrotransposon, as predicted.
This showed that the alcohol had led to a change in the epigenetic
modifications in the mice. Disruption of epigenetic developmental
programming may lead to at least some of the debilitating and lifelong
symptoms of foetal alcohol syndrome in children of mothers who over-use
alcohol during pregnancy.

Bisphenol A is a compound used in the manufacture of polycarbonate
plastics. Feeding bisphenol A to agouti mice results in a change in the
distribution of coat colour, suggesting this chemical has effects on
developmental programming through epigenetic mechanisms. In 2011 the
European Union outlawed bisphenol A in drinking bottles for babies.

Early programming may also be one of the reasons that it’s been very
difficult to identify the environmental effects that lead to some
chronic human conditions. If we study pairs of MZ twins who are
discordant for a specific phenotype, for example multiple sclerosis, it
may be well nigh impossible to identify an environmental cause. It may
simply be that one of the pair was exceptionally unlucky in the random
epigenetic fluctuations that established certain key patterns of gene
expression early in life. Scientists are now mapping the distribution of
epigenetic changes in concordant and discordant MZ twins for a number of
disorders, to try to identify histone or DNA modifications that
correlate with the presence or absence of disease.

Children conceived during famines and mice with yellow coats have each
clearly taught us remarkable things about early development, and the
importance of epigenetics in this process. Oddly enough, these two
disparate groups have one other thing to teach us. At the very beginning
of the 19th century, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck published his most famous
work, Philosophie Zoologique. He hypothesised that acquired
characteristics can be transmitted from one generation to the next, and
that this drives evolution. As an example, a short-necked giraffe-like
animal that elongated its neck by constant stretching would pass on a
longer neck to its offspring. This theory has been generally dismissed
and in most cases it is simply wrong. But the Dutch Hunger Winter cohort
and the yellow mice have shown us that startlingly, the heretical
Lamarckian model of inheritance can, just sometimes, be right on the
money, as we are about to see.

  Chapter 6

 

  The Sins of the Fathers

 

  For I, the Lord your God, am a jealous God, punishing the children for
  the sins of the fathers to the third and fourth generation of those
  who hate me

  Exodus, Chapter 20, Verse 5

 

The Just So stories published by Rudyard Kipling at the very beginning
of the 20th century are an imaginative set of tales about origins. Some
of the most famous are those about the phenotypes of animals – How the
Leopard Got his Spots, The Beginning of the Armadillos, How the Camel
Got his Hump. They are written purely as entertaining fantasies but
scientifically they hark back to a century earlier and Lamarck’s theory
of evolution through the inheritance of acquired characteristics.
Kipling’s stories describe how one animal acquired a physical
characteristic – the elephant’s long trunk, for example – and the
implication is that all the offspring inherited that characteristic, and
hence all elephants now have long trunks.

Kipling was having fun with his stories, whereas Lamarck was trying to
develop a scientific theory. Like any good scientist, he tried to
collect data relevant to this hypothesis. In one of the most famous
examples of this, Lamarck recorded that the sons of blacksmiths (a very
physical trade) tended to have larger arm muscles than the sons of
weavers (a much less physical occupation). Lamarck interpreted this as
the blacksmiths’ sons inheriting the acquired phenotype of large muscles
from their fathers.

Our modern interpretation is different. We recognise that a man whose
genes tended to endow him with the ability to develop large muscles
would be at an advantage in a trade such as blacksmithing. This
occupation would attract those who were genetically best suited to it.
Our interpretation would also encompass the likelihood that the
blacksmith’s sons may have inherited this genetic tendency towards
chunky biceps. Finally, we would acknowledge that at the time that
Lamarck was writing, children were used routinely as additional members
of a family workforce. The children of a blacksmith were more likely
than those of a weaver to be performing relatively heavy manual labour
from an early age and hence would be likely to develop larger arm
muscles as a response to their environment, just as we all do when we
pump iron.

It would be a mistake to look back on Lamarck and only mock. We no
longer accept most of his ideas scientifically, but we should
acknowledge that he was making a genuine attempt to address important
questions. Inevitably, and quite rightly, Lamarck has been overshadowed
by Charles Darwin, the true colossus of 19th century biology – actually,
probably the colossus of biology generally. Darwin’s model of the
evolution of species via natural selection has been the single most
powerful conceptual framework in biological sciences. Its power became
even greater once married to Mendel’s work on inheritance and our
molecular understanding of DNA as the raw material of inheritance.

If we wanted to summarise a century and a half of evolutionary theory in
one paragraph we might say:

Random variation in genes creates phenotypic variation in individuals.
Some individuals will survive better than others in a particular
environment, and these individuals are likely to have more offspring.
These offspring may inherit the same advantageous genetic variation as
their parent, so they too will have increased breeding success.
Eventually, over a huge number of generations, separate species will
evolve.

The raw material for random variation is mutation of the DNA sequence of
the individual; his or her genome. Mutation rates are generally very
low, and so it takes a long time for advantageous mutations to develop
and to spread through a population. This is especially the case if each
mutation only gives an individual a slight advantage over its
competitors in a particular environment.

This is where the Lamarckian model of acquired characteristics really
falls over, relative to Darwinian models. An acquired change in
phenotype would somehow have to ‘feed-back’ onto the DNA script and
change it really dramatically, so that the acquired characteristic could
be transmitted in the space of just one generation, from parent to
child. But there’s very little evidence that this happens, except
occasionally in response to chemicals or irradiation which damage DNA
(mutagens), causing a change in the actual base-pair sequence. Even
these mutagens only affect the genome at a relatively small percentage
of base-pairs and in a random pattern, so these still can’t drive
inheritance of acquired characteristics in any meaningful way.

The overwhelming body of data argues against Lamarckian inheritance, so
there’s very little reason for individual scientists to work on this
experimentally. This isn’t surprising. After all, if you are a scientist
interested in the Solar System, you could choose to investigate the
hypothesis that at least some parts of the Moon are made of cheese. But
to do so would mean that you wilfully ignored the large body of evidence
already present against this – hardly a rational approach.

There’s also possibly a cultural reason that scientists have shied away
from experimental investigations of the inheritance of acquired
characteristics. One of the most notorious cases of scientific fraud is
that of Paul Kammerer, who worked in Austria in the first half of the
20th century. He claimed that he had demonstrated the inheritance of
acquired characteristics in a species called the midwife toad.

Kammerer reported that when he changed the conditions in which the toads
bred, they developed ‘useful’ adaptations. These adaptations were
structures on their forelimbs called nuptial pads, which were black in
colour. Unfortunately, very few of the specimens were retained or stored
well, and when a rival scientist examined a specimen he found that India
ink had been injected into the pad. Kammerer denied all knowledge of the
contamination and killed himself shortly afterwards. This scandal
tainted an already controversial field1.

One of the statements in our potted history of evolutionary theory was
the following, ‘An acquired change in phenotype would somehow have to
‘feed-back’ onto the DNA script and change it really dramatically so
that the acquired characteristic could be transmitted in the space of
just one generation, from parent to child.’

It’s certainly hard to imagine how an environmental influence on the
cells of an individual could act at a specific gene to change the
base-pair sequence. But it’s all too obvious that epigenetic
modifications – be these DNA methylation or alterations to the histone
proteins – do indeed occur at specific genes in response to the
environmental influences on a cell. The response to hormonal signalling
that was mentioned in an earlier chapter was an example of this.
Typically, a hormone like oestrogen will bind to a receptor on a cell
from, for example, the breast. The oestrogen and the receptor stay
together and move into the nucleus of the cell. They bind to specific
motifs in DNA – A, C, G and T bases in a particular sequence – which are
found at the promoters of certain genes. This helps to switch on the
genes. When it binds to these motifs, the oestrogen receptor also
attracts various epigenetic enzymes. These alter the histone
modifications, removing marks that repress gene expression and putting
on marks that tend to switch genes on. In this way, the environment,
acting via hormones, can change the epigenetic pattern at specific
genes.

These epigenetic modifications don’t change the sequence of a gene, but
they do alter how the gene is expressed. This is, after all, the whole
basis of developmental programming for later disease. We know that
epigenetic modifications can be transmitted from a parent cell to a
daughter cell, as this is why there are no teeth in your eyeballs. If a
similar mechanism transmitted an environmentally-induced epigenetic
modification from an individual to their offspring, we would have a
mechanism for a sort of Lamarckian inheritance. An epigenetic (as
opposed to genetic) change would be passed down from parent to child.

Heresy and the Dutch Hunger Winter

 

It’s all very well to think about how this could happen, but really we
need to know if acquired characteristics can actually be inherited in
this way. Not how does it happen, but the more basic question of does it
happen? Remarkably, there appear to be some specific situations where
this is indeed taking place. This doesn’t mean that Darwinian/Mendelian
models are wrong, it just means that, as always, the world of biology is
more complicated than we imagined.

The scientific literature on this contains some confusing terminology.
Some early papers refer to epigenetic transmission of an acquired trait
but don’t seem to have any evidence of DNA methylation changes, or
histone alterations. This isn’t sloppiness on the part of the authors.
It’s because of the different ways in which the word epigenetics has
been used. In the early papers the phrase ‘epigenetic transmission’
refers to inheritance that cannot be explained by genetics. In these
cases, the word epigenetic is being used to describe the phenomenon, not
the molecular mechanism. To try to keep everything a little clearer,
we’ll use the phrase ‘transgenerational inheritance’ to describe the
phenomenon of transmission of an acquired characteristic and only use
‘epigenetics’ to describe molecular events.

Some of the strongest evidence for transgenerational inheritance in
humans comes from the survivors of the Dutch Hunger Winter. Because the
Netherlands has such excellent medical infrastructure, and high
standards of patient data collection and retention, it has been possible
for epidemiologists to follow the survivors of the period of famine for
many years. Significantly, they were able to monitor not just the people
who had been alive in the Dutch Hunger Winter, but also their children
and their grandchildren.

This monitoring identified an extraordinary effect. As we have already
seen, when pregnant women suffered malnutrition during the first three
months of the pregnancy, their babies were born with normal weight, but
in adulthood were at higher risk of obesity and other disorders.
Bizarrely, when women from this set of babies became mothers themselves,
their first born child tended to be heavier than in control groups2,3.
This is shown in Figure 6.1, where the relative sizes of the babies have
been exaggerated for clarity, and where we’ve given the women arbitrary
Dutch names.

[Fig-11.eps]

 

Figure 6.1 The effects of malnutrition across two generations of
children and grandchildren of women who were pregnant during the Dutch
Hunger Winter. The timing of the malnutrition in pregnancy was critical
for the subsequent effects on body weight.

 

The effects on the birth weight of baby Camilla shown at the bottom left
are really odd. When Camilla was developing, her mother Basje was
presumably healthy. The only period of malnutrition that Basje had
suffered was twenty or more years earlier, when she was going through
her own first stages of development in the womb. Yet it seems that this
has an effect on her own child, even though Camilla was never exposed to
a period of malnutrition during early development.

This seems like a good example of transgenerational (Lamarckian)
inheritance, but has it has been caused by an epigenetic mechanism? Did
an epigenetic change (altered DNA methylation and/or variations in
histone modifications) that had occurred in Basje as a result of
malnutrition during her first twelve weeks of development in the womb
get passed on via the nucleus of her egg to her own child? Maybe, but we
shouldn’t ignore that there are other potential explanations.

For example, there could be an unidentified effect of the early
malnutrition which means that when pregnant, Basje will pass more
nutrients than normal across the placenta to her foetus. This would
still create a transgenerational effect – Camilla’s increased size – but
it wouldn’t be caused by Basje passing on an epigenetic modification to
Camilla. It would be caused by the conditions in the womb when Camilla
was developing and growing (the intra-uterine environment).

It’s also important to remember that a human egg is large. It contains a
nucleus which is relatively small in volume compared to the surrounding
cytoplasm. Imagine a grape inside a satsuma to gain some idea of
relative sizes. The cytoplasm carries out a lot of functions when an egg
gets fertilised. Perhaps something occurred during early developmental
programming in Basje that ultimately resulted in the cytoplasm of her
eggs containing something unusual. That might sound unlikely but egg
production in female mammals is actually initiated early in their own
embryonic development. The earliest stages of zygote development rely to
a large extent on the cytoplasm from the egg. An abnormality in the
cytoplasm could stimulate an unusual growth pattern in the foetus. This
again would result in transgenerational inheritance but not through the
direct transmission of an epigenetic modification.

So we can see that there are various mechanisms that could explain the
inheritance patterns seen through the maternal line in the Dutch Hunger
Winter survivors. It would help us to understand if epigenetics plays a
role in acquired inheritance if we could study a less complicated human
situation. Ideally, this would be a scenario where we don’t have to
worry about the effects of the intra-uterine environment, or the
cytoplasm of the egg.

Let’s hear it for fathers. Because men don’t get pregnant, they can’t
contribute to the developmental environment of the foetus. Males also
don’t contribute much cytoplasm to the zygote. Sperm are very small and
are almost all nucleus – they look like little bullets with tails
attached. So if we see transgenerational inheritance from father to
child, it isn’t likely to be caused by intra-uterine or cytoplasmic
effects. Under these circumstances, an epigenetic mechanism would be an
attractive candidate for explaining transgenerational inheritance of an
acquired characteristic.

Greedy fellows in Sweden

 

Some data suggesting that male transgenerational inheritance can occur
in humans comes from another historical study. There is a geographically
isolated region in Northern Sweden called Överkalix. In the late 19th
and early 20th centuries there were periods of terrible food shortages
(caused by failed harvests, military actions and transport
inadequacies), interspersed with periods of great plenty. Scientists
have studied the mortality patterns for descendants of people who were
alive during these periods. In particular, they analysed food intake
during a stage in childhood known as the slow growth period (SGP). All
other factors being equal, children grow slowest in the years leading up
to puberty. This is a completely normal phenomenon, seen in most
populations.

Using historical records, the researchers deduced that if food was
scarce during a father’s SGP, his son was at decreased risk of dying
through cardiovascular disease (such as stroke, high blood pressure or
coronary artery disease). If, on the other hand, a man had access to a
surfeit of food during the SGP, his grandsons were at increased risk of
dying as a consequence of diabetic illnesses4. Just like Camilla in the
Dutch Hunger Winter example, the sons and grandsons had an altered
phenotype (a change in the risk of death through cardiovascular disease
or diabetes) in response to an environmental challenge they themselves
had never experienced.

These data can’t be a result of the intra-uterine environment nor of
cytoplasmic effects, for the reasons outlined earlier. Therefore, it
seems reasonable to hypothesise that the transgenerational consequences
of food availability in the grandparental generation were mediated via
epigenetics. These data are particularly striking when you consider that
the original nutritional effect happened when the boys were
pre-pubescent and so had not even begun to produce sperm. Even so, they
were able to pass an effect on to their sons and grandsons.

However, there are some caveats around this work on transgenerational
inheritance through the male line. In particular, there are risks
involved in relying on old death records, and extrapolating backwards
through historical data. Additionally, some of the effects that were
observed were not terribly large. This is frequently a problem when
working with human populations, along with all the other issues we have
already discussed, such as our genetic variability and the impossibility
of controlling environment in any major way. There is always the risk
that we draw inappropriate conclusions from our data, rather as we
believe Lamarck did with his studies on the families of blacksmiths.

The heretical mouse

 

Is there an alternative way of investigating transgenerational
inheritance? If this phenomenon also occurs in other species, it would
give us a lot more confidence that these effects are real. This is
because experiments in model systems can be designed to test specific
hypotheses, rather than just using the datasets that nature (or history)
provides.

This is where we come back to the agouti mouse. Emma Whitelaw’s work
showed that the variable coat colour in the agouti mouse was due to an
epigenetic mechanism, specifically DNA methylation of a retrotransposon
in the agouti gene. Mice of different colour all had the same DNA
sequence, but a different degree of epigenetic modification at the
retrotransposon.

Professor Whitelaw decided to investigate if the coat colour could be
inherited. If it could, it would show that it’s not only DNA that gets
transmitted from parent to offspring, but also epigenetic modifications
to the genome. This would provide a potential mechanism for the
transgenerational inheritance of acquired characteristics.

When Emma Whitelaw allowed female agouti mice to breed, she found the
effect that is shown in Figure 6.2. For convenience, the picture only
shows the offspring who inherited the Avy retrotransposon from their
mother, as this is the effect we are interested in.

If the mother had an unmethylated Avy gene, and hence had yellow fur,
all her offspring also had either yellow fur, or slightly mottled fur.
She never had offspring who developed the very dark fur associated with
the methylation of the retrotransposon.

By contrast, if the mother’s Avy gene was heavily methylated, resulting
in her having dark fur, some of her offspring also had dark fur. If both
grandmother and mother had dark fur, then the effect was even more
pronounced. About a third of the final offspring had dark fur, compared
with the one in five shown in Figure 6.2.

[Fig-12.eps]

 

Figure 6.2 The coat colour of genetically identical female mice
influences the coat colour of their offspring. Yellow female mice, in
whom the agouti gene is expressed continuously, due to low levels of DNA
methylation of the regulatory retrotransposon, never give birth to dark
pups. The epigenetically – rather than genetically – determined
characteristics of the mother influence her offspring.

 

Because Emma Whitelaw was working on inbred mice, she was able to
perform this experiment multiple times and generate hundreds of
genetically identical offspring. This was important, as the more data
points we have in an experiment, the more we can rely on the findings.
Statistical tests showed that the phenotypic differences between the
genetically identical groups were highly significant. In other words, it
was very unlikely that the effects occurred by chance5.

The results from these experiments showed that an
epigenetically-mediated effect (the DNA methylation-dependent coat
pattern) in an animal was transmitted to its offspring. But did the mice
actually inherit directly an epigenetic modification from their mother?

There was a possibility that the effects seen were not directly caused
by inheritance of the epigenetic modification at the Avy
retrotransposon, but through some other mechanism. When the agouti gene
is switched on too much, it doesn’t just cause yellow fur. Agouti also
mis-regulates the expression of other genes, which ultimately results in
the yellow mice being fat and diabetic. So it’s likely that the
intra-uterine environment would be different between yellow and dark
pregnant females, with different nutrient availability for their
embryos. The nutrient availability could itself change how particular
epigenetic marks get deposited at the Avy retrotransposon in the
offspring. This would look like epigenetic inheritance, but actually the
pups wouldn’t have directly inherited the DNA methylation pattern from
their mother. Instead, they’d just have gone through a similar
developmental programming process in response to nutrient availability
in the uterus.

Indeed, at the time of Emma Whitelaw’s work, scientists already knew
that diet could influence coat colour in agouti mice. When pregnant
agouti mice are fed a diet rich in the chemicals that can supply methyl
groups to the cells (methyl donors), the ratios of the differently
coloured pups changes6. This is presumably because the cells are able to
use more methyl groups, and deposit more methylation on their DNA, hence
shutting down the abnormal expression of agouti. This meant that the
Whitelaw group had to be really careful to control for the effect of
intra-uterine nutrition in their experiments.

In one of those experiments that simply aren’t possible in humans, they
transferred fertilised eggs obtained from yellow mothers and implanted
them into dark females, and vice versa. In every case, the distribution
of coat patterns in the offspring was the same as was to be expected
from the egg donor, i.e. the biological mother, rather than the
surrogate. This showed unequivocally that it wasn’t the intra-uterine
environment that controlled the coat patterning. By using complex
breeding schemes, they also demonstrated that the inheritance of the
coat pattern was not due to the cytoplasm in the egg. Taken together,
the most straightforward interpretation of these data is that epigenetic
inheritance has taken place. In other words, an epigenetic modification
(probably DNA methylation) was transferred along with the genetic code.

This transfer of the phenotype from one generation to the next wasn’t
perfect – not all the offspring looked exactly the same as their mother.
This implies that the DNA methylation that controls the expression of
the agouti phenotype wasn’t entirely stable down the generations. This
is quite analogous to the effects we see in suspected cases of human
transgenerational inheritance, such as the Dutch Hunger Winter. If we
look at a large enough number of people in our study group we can detect
differences in birth weight between various groups, but we can’t make
absolute predictions about a single individual.

There is also an unusual gender-specific phenomenon in the agouti
strain. Although coat pattern showed a clear transgenerational effect
when it was passed on from mother to pup, no such effect was seen when a
male mouse passed on the Avy retrotransposon to his offspring. It didn’t
matter if a male mouse was yellow, lightly mottled or dark. When he
fathered a litter, there were likely to be all the different patterns of
colour in his offspring.

But there are other examples of epigenetic inheritance transmitted from
both males and females. The kinked tail phenotype in mice, which is
caused by variable methylation of a retrotransposon in the AxinFu (Axin
fused) gene, can be transmitted by either the mother or the father7.
This makes it unlikely that transgenerational inheritance of this
characteristic is due to intra-uterine or cytoplasmic influences,
because fathers don’t really contribute much to these. It’s far more
likely that there is the transmission of an epigenetic modification at
the AxinFu gene from either parent to offspring.

These model systems have been really useful in demonstrating that
transgenerational inheritance of a non-genetic phenotype does actually
occur, and that this takes place via epigenetic modifications. This is
truly revolutionary. It confirms that for some very specific situations
Lamarckian inheritance is taking place, and we have a handle on the
molecular mechanism behind it. But the agouti and kinked tail phenotypes
in mice both rely on the presence of specific retrotransposons in the
genome. Are these special cases, or is there a more general effect in
play? Once again, we return to something that has a bit more immediate
relevance for us all. Food.

The epigenetics of obesity

 

As we all know, an obesity epidemic is developing. It’s spreading
worldwide, although it’s advancing at a particularly fast rate in the
more industrialised societies. The frankly terrifying graph in Figure
6.3 displays the UK figures for 20078, showing that about two out of
every three adults is overweight (body mass index of 25 or over) or
obese (body mass index of 30 or over). The situation is even worse in
the USA. Obesity is associated with a wide range of health problems
including cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes. Obese individuals
over the age of 40 will die, on average, 6 to 7 years earlier than
non-obese people9.

[Fig-13.eps]

 

Figure 6.3 The percentage of the UK population that was overweight or
obese in 2007.

 

The data from the Dutch Hunger Winter and other famines support the idea
that poor nutrition during pregnancy has effects on offspring, and that
these consequences can be transmitted to subsequent generations as well.
In other words, poor nutrition can have epigenetic effects on later
generations. The data from the Överkalix cohort, although more difficult
to interpret, suggested that excess consumption at key points in a boy’s
life can have adverse consequences for later generations. Is it possible
that the obesity epidemic in the human population will have knock-on
effects for children and grandchildren? As we don’t really want to wait
40 years to work this out, scientists are again turning to animal models
to try to gain some useful insights.

The first animal data suggested that nutrition might not have much
effect transgenerationally. The change in coat pattern of pups when
pregnant agouti mice were given diets high in methyl donors didn’t
transmit to the next generation10. But perhaps this is too specialised a
model. In 2010, two papers were published that should at least give us
pause for thought. They were published in two of the best journals in
the world – Nature and Cell. In both cases, the researchers overfed male
animals and then monitored the effects on their offspring. By
restricting their experiments to males, they didn’t need to worry about
the intra-uterine and cytoplasmic complications that cause such
(metaphorical) headaches if studying females.

One of the studies used a breed of rat called Sprague-Dawley. This is an
albino rat, with a chilled-out temperament that makes it easy to keep
and handle. In the experiments male Sprague-Dawleys were given a
high-fat diet, and allowed to mate with females who had been fed an
ordinary diet. The over-fed males were overweight (hardly a surprise),
had a high percentage of fat to muscle and had many of the symptoms
found in type 2 diabetes in humans. Offspring were normal weight but
they too had the diabetes-type abnormalities11. Many of the genes that
control metabolism and how mammals burn fuel were mis-regulated in these
offspring. For reasons that aren’t understood, it was particularly the
daughters that showed this effect.

A completely independent group studied the effects of diet in an inbred
mouse strain. Male mice were fed a diet that was abnormally low in
protein. The diet had an increased percentage of sugar to make up for
this. The males were mated to females on a normal diet. The researchers
examined the expression of genes in the liver (the body’s major organ
when it comes to metabolism) in three-week-old pups from these matings.
Analysing large numbers of mouse pups, they found that the regulation of
many of the genes involved in metabolism was abnormal in the offspring
of the males that had been fed the modified diet12. They also found
changes in the epigenetic modifications in the livers of these pups.

So, both these studies show us that, at least in rodents, a father’s
diet can directly influence the epigenetic modifications, gene
expression and health of his offspring. And not because of environment –
this isn’t like the human example of a child getting fat because their
Dad only ever feeds them super-sized portions of burgers and chips. It’s
a direct effect and it occurred so frequently in the rats and mice that
it can’t have been due to diet-induced mutations, they just don’t happen
at that sort of rate. So the most likely explanation is that diet
induces epigenetic effects that can be transmitted from father to child.
Although the data are quite preliminary, the results from the mouse
study in particular support this.

If you look at all the data in its entirety – from humans to rodents,
from famine to feast – a quite worrying pattern emerges. Maybe the old
saw of ‘we are what we eat’ doesn’t go far enough. Maybe we’re also what
our parents ate and what their parents ate before them.

This might make us wonder if there is any point following advice on
healthy living. If we are all victims of epigenetic determinism, this
would suggest that our dice have already been rolled, and we are just at
the mercy of our ancestors’ methylation patterns. But this is far too
simplistic a model. Overwhelming amounts of data show that the health
advice issued by government agencies and charities – eating a healthy
diet rich in fruit and vegetables, getting off the sofa, not smoking –
is completely sound. We are complex organisms, and our health and life
expectancy are influenced by our genome, our epigenome and our
environment. But remember that even in the inbred agouti mice, kept
under standardised conditions, researchers couldn’t predict exactly how
yellow or how fat an individual mouse in a newborn litter would become.
Why not do everything that we can to improve our chances of a healthy
and long life? And if we are planning to have children, don’t we want to
do whatever we can to nudge them that bit closer to good health?

There will always be things we can’t control, of course. One of the
best-documented examples of an environmental factor that has epigenetic
consequences, lasting at least four generations, is an environmental
toxin. Vinclozolin is a fungicide, which tends to be used particularly
frequently in the wine industry. If it gets into mammals it is converted
into a compound that binds to the androgen receptor. This is the
receptor that binds testosterone, the male hormone that is vital for
sexual development, sperm production and a host of other effects in
males. When vinclozolin binds to the androgen receptor, it prevents
testosterone from transmitting its usual signals to the cells, and so
blocks the normal effects of the hormone.

If vinclozolin is given to pregnant rats at the time when the testes are
developing in the embryos, the male offspring are born with testicular
defects and have reduced fertility. The same effect is found for the
next three generations13. About 90 per cent of the male rats are
affected, which is far too high a percentage to be caused by classic DNA
mutation. Even the highest known rates of mutation, at particularly
sensitive regions of the genome, are at least ten-fold less frequent
than this. In these rat experiments, only one generation was exposed to
vinclozolin, yet the effect lasted for at least four generations, so
this is another example of Lamarckian inheritance. Given the male
transmission pattern, it is likely this is another example of an
epigenetic inheritance mechanism. A follow-on publication from the same
research group has identified regions of the genome where vinclozolin
treatment leads to unusual DNA methylation patterns14.

The rats in the studies described above were treated with high doses of
vinclozolin. These were much larger than humans are believed to
encounter in the environment. Nonetheless, effects such as these are one
of the reasons why some authorities are beginning to investigate if
artificial hormones and hormone disrupters in the environment (from
excretion of chemicals present in the contraceptive pill, to certain
pesticides) have the potential to cause subtle, but potentially
transgenerational effects in the human population.

  Chapter 7

 

  The Generations Game

 

  The animals went in two by two, hurrah! Hurrah!

  Traditional song

 

Sometimes, the best science starts with the simplest of questions. The
question may seem so obvious that almost nobody thinks to ask it, let
alone answer it. We just don’t challenge things that seem completely
self-evident. Yet occasionally, when someone stands up and asks, ‘How
does that happen?’, we all realise that a phenomenon that seems too
obvious to mention, is actually a complete mystery. This is true of one
of the most fundamental aspects of human biology, one we almost never
think about.

When mammals (including humans) reproduce, why does this require a male
and a female parent?

In sexual reproduction the small, very energetic sperm swim like crazy
to get to the large, relatively sedentary egg. When a winning sperm
penetrates the egg, the nuclei from the two cells fuse to create the
zygote that divides to form every cell in the body. Sperm and eggs are
referred to as gametes. When gametes are produced in the mammalian body,
each gamete receives only half the normal number of chromosomes. This
means they only have 23 chromosomes, one of each pair. This is known as
a haploid genome. When the two nuclei fuse after a sperm has penetrated
the egg, the chromosome number is restored to that of all ordinary cells
(46) and the genome is called diploid. It’s important that the egg and
the sperm are both haploid, otherwise each generation would end up with
twice as many chromosomes as its parents.

We could hypothesise that the reason why mammals all have a mother and
father is because that’s what we need to introduce two haploid genomes
to one another, to create a new cell with a full complement of
chromosomes. Certainly it’s true that this is what normally happens but
this model would also imply that the only reason why biologically we
need a parent of each sex is because of a delivery system.

Conrad Waddington’s grandson

 

In 2010 Professor Robert Edwards received the Nobel Prize in Physiology
or Medicine for his pioneering work in the field of in vitro
fertilisation, which led to the so-called test tube babies. In this
work, eggs were removed from a woman’s body, fertilised in the
laboratory, and re-implanted back into the uterus. In vitro
fertilisation was hugely challenging, and Professor Edwards’ success in
human reproduction was built on years of painstaking work in mice.

This mouse work laid the foundation for a remarkable series of
experiments, which demonstrated there’s a lot more to mammalian
reproduction than just a delivery system. The major force in this field
is Professor Azim Surani, from Cambridge University, who started his
scientific career by obtaining his PhD under the supervision of Robert
Edwards. Since Professor Edwards received his early research training in
Conrad Waddington’s lab, we can think of Azim Surani as Conrad
Waddington’s intellectual grandson.

Azim Surani is another of those UK academics who carries his prestige
very lightly, despite his status. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society
and a Commander of the British Empire, and has been awarded the
prestigious Gabor Medal and Royal Society Royal Medal. Like John Gurdon
and Adrian Bird, he continues to break new ground in a research area
that he pioneered over a quarter of a century ago.

Starting in the mid 1980s, Azim Surani carried out a programme of
experiments which showed unequivocally that mammalian reproduction is
much more than a matter of a delivery system. We don’t just need a
biological mother and a biological father because that’s how two haploid
genomes fuse to form one diploid nucleus. It actually matters enormously
that half of our DNA comes from our mother and half from our father.

Figure 7.1 shows what a just-fertilised egg looks like, before the two
genomes meet. It’s simplified and exaggerated, but it will serve our
purpose. The haploid nuclei from the egg and the sperm are called
pro-nuclei.

[Fig-14.eps]

 

Figure 7.1 The mammalian egg just after it has been penetrated by a
sperm, but before the two haploid (half the normal chromosome number)
pronuclei have fused. Note the disparity in size between the pronucleus
that came from the egg, and the one that originated from the sperm.

 

We can see that the female pronucleus is much bigger than the male one.
This is very important experimentally, as it means that we can tell the
different pronuclei apart. Because we can tell them apart, scientists
can transfer a pronucleus from one cell to another, and be certain about
which one they transferred. They know if they transferred a pronucleus
that came from the father’s sperm (male pronucleus) or from the mother’s
egg (female pronucleus).

Many years ago Professor Gurdon used tiny micropipettes to transfer the
nuclei from the body cells of toads into toad eggs. Azim Surani used a
refinement of this technology to transfer pronuclei between different
fertilised eggs from mice. The manipulated fertilised eggs were then
implanted into female mice and allowed to develop.

In a slew of papers, mainly published between the years of 1984 and
1987, Professor Surani demonstrated that it’s essential to have a male
and a female pronucleus in order to create new living mice. This is
shown graphically in Figure 7.2.

[Fig-15.eps]

 

Figure 7.2 A summary of the outcomes from the early work of Azim Surani.
The pronucleus was removed from a mouse egg. This donor egg was then
injected with two haploid pronuclei and the resulting diploid egg was
implanted into a mouse surrogate mother. Live mice resulted only from
the eggs which had been reconstituted with one male and one female
pronucleus. Embryos from eggs reconstituted with either two male or two
female pronuclei failed to develop properly and the embryos died during
development.

 

To control for the effects of different DNA genomes, the researchers
used inbred mouse strains. This ensured that the three types of
fertilised eggs shown in the diagram were genetically identical. Yet
despite being genetically identical, a series of experiments from Azim
Surani and his colleagues1,2,3, along with other work from the
laboratories of Davor Solter4 and Bruce Cattanach5 were conclusive. If
the fertilised egg contained only two female pronuclei, or two male
ones, no live mice were ever born. You needed a pronucleus of each sex.

This is an absolutely remarkable finding. In all three scenarios shown
in the diagram, the zygote ends up with exactly the same amount of
genetic material. Each zygote has a diploid genome (two copies of every
chromosome). If the only factor that was important in the creation of a
new individual was the amount of DNA, then all three types of fertilised
eggs should have developed to form new individuals.

Quantity isn’t everything

 

This led to a revolutionary concept – the maternal and paternal genomes
may deliver the same DNA but they are not functionally equivalent. It’s
not enough just to have the correct amount of the correct sequence of
DNA. We have to inherit some from our mother and some from our father.
Somehow, our genes ‘remember’ who they come from. They will only
function properly if they come from the ‘correct’ parent. Just having
the right number of copies of each gene, doesn’t fulfil the requirements
for normal development and healthy life.

We know that this isn’t some strange effect that only applies to mice,
because of a naturally occurring human condition. In about one in 1500
human pregnancies, for example, there is a placenta in the uterus but
there is no foetus. The placenta is abnormal, covered in fluid-filled,
grape-like lumps. This structure is called a hydatidiform mole, and in
some Asian populations the frequency of these molar pregnancies can be
as high as 1 in 200. The apparently pregnant women gain weight, often
more quickly than in a normal pregnancy and they also suffer morning
sickness, often to a quite extreme degree. The rapidly-growing placental
structures produce abnormally high levels of a hormone which is thought
to be responsible for the symptoms of nausea in pregnancy.

In countries with good healthcare infrastructure, the hydatidiform mole
is normally detected at the first ultrasound scan, and then an
abortion-type procedure is carried out by a medical team. If not
detected, the mole will usually abort spontaneously at around four or
five months post-fertilisation. Early detection of these moles is
important as they can form potentially dangerous tumours if they aren’t
removed.

These moles are formed if an egg which has somehow lost its nucleus is
fertilised. In about 80 per cent of hydatidiform molar pregnancies, an
empty egg is fertilised by a single sperm, and the haploid sperm genome
is copied to create a diploid genome. In about 20 per cent of cases the
empty egg is fertilised simultaneously by two sperm. In both cases the
fertilised egg has the correct number of chromosomes (46), but all the
DNA came from the father. Because of this, no foetus develops. Just like
the experimental mice, human development requires chromosomes from both
the mother and the father.

This human condition and the experiments in mice are impossible to
reconcile with a model based only on the DNA code, where DNA is a naked
molecule, which carries information only in its sequence of A, C, G and
T base-pairs. DNA alone isn’t carrying all the necessary information for
the creation of new life. Something else must be required in addition to
the genetic information. Something epigenetic.

Eggs and sperm are highly specialised cells – they are at the bottom of
one of Waddington’s troughs. The egg and the sperm will never be
anything other than an egg and a sperm. Unless they fuse. Once they
fuse, these two highly specialised cells form one cell which is so
unspecialised it is totipotent and gives rise to every cell in the human
body, and the placenta. This is the zygote, at the very top of
Waddington’s epigenetic landscape. As this zygote divides, the cells
become more and more specialised, forming all the tissues of our bodies.
Some of these tissues ultimately give rise to eggs or sperm (depending
on our sex, obviously) and the whole cycle is ready to start again.
There’s effectively a never-ending circle in developmental biology.

The chromosomes in the pro-nuclei of sperm and eggs carry large numbers
of epigenetic modifications. This is part of what keeps these gametes
behaving as gametes, and not turning into other cell types. But these
gametes can’t be passing on their epigenetic patterns, because if they
did the fertilised zygote would be some sort of half-egg, half-sperm
hybrid when it clearly isn’t this at all. It’s a completely different
totipotent cell that will give rise to an entirely new individual.
Somehow the modifications on eggs and sperm get changed to a different
set of modifications, to drive the fertilised egg into a different cell
state, at a different position in Waddington’s epigenetic landscape.
This is part of normal development.

Re-installing the operating system

 

Almost immediately after the sperm has penetrated the egg, something
very dramatic happens to it. Pretty much all the methylation on the male
pronucleus DNA (i.e. from the sperm) gets stripped off, incredibly
quickly. The same thing happens to the DNA on the female pronucleus,
albeit a lot more slowly. This means that a lot of the epigenetic memory
gets wiped off the genome. This is vital for putting the zygote at the
top of Waddington’s epigenetic landscape. The zygote starts dividing and
soon creates the blastocyst – the golf ball inside the tennis ball from
Chapter 2. The cells in the golf ball – the inner cell mass, or ICM –
are the pluripotent cells, the ones that give rise to embryonic stem
cells in the laboratory.

The cells of the ICM soon differentiate and start giving rise to the
different cell types of our bodies. This happens through very tightly
regulated expression of a few key genes. One specific protein, for
example OCT4, switches on another set of genes, which results in a
further cascade of gene expression, and so on. We have met OCT4 before –
it is the most critical of all the genes that Professor Yamanaka used to
reprogram somatic cells. These cascades of gene expression are
associated with epigenetic modification of the genome, changing the DNA
and histone marks so that certain genes stay switched on or get switched
off appropriately. Here’s the sequence of epigenetic events in very
early development:

1.  The male and female pronuclei (from the sperm and the egg
    respectively) are carrying epigenetic modifications;
2.  The epigenetic modifications get taken off (in the immediate
    post-fertilisation zygote);
3.  New epigenetic modifications get put on (as the cells begin to
    specialise).

This is a bit of a simplification. It’s certainly true that researchers
can detect huge swathes of DNA demethylation during stage 2 from this
list. However, it’s actually more complicated than this, particularly in
respect of histone modifications. Whilst some histone modifications are
being removed, others are becoming established. At the same time as the
repressive DNA methylation is removed, certain histone marks which
repress gene expression are also erased. Other histone modifications
which increase gene expression may take their place. It’s therefore too
naïve to refer to the epigenetic changes as just being about putting on
or taking off epigenetic modifications. In reality, the epigenome is
being reprogrammed.

Reprogramming is what John Gurdon demonstrated in his ground-breaking
work when he transferred the nuclei from adult toads into toad eggs.
It’s what happened when Keith Campbell and Ian Wilmut cloned Dolly the
Sheep by putting the nucleus from a mammary gland cell into an egg. It’s
what Yamanaka achieved when he treated somatic cells with four key
genes, all of which code for proteins highly expressed naturally during
this reprogramming phase.

The egg is a wonderful thing, honed through hundreds of millions of
years of evolution to be extraordinarily effective at generating vast
quantities of epigenetic change, across billions of base-pairs. None of
the artificial means of reprogramming cells comes close to the natural
process in terms of speed or efficiency. But the egg probably doesn’t
quite do everything unaided. At the very least, the pattern of
epigenetic modifications in sperm is one that allows the male pronucleus
to be reprogrammed relatively easily. The sperm epigenome is primed to
be reprogrammed6.

Unfortunately, these priming chromatin modifications (and many other
features of the sperm nucleus), are missing if an adult nucleus is
reprogrammed by transferring it into a fertilised egg. That’s also true
when an adult nucleus is reprogrammed by treating it with the four
Yamanaka factors to create iPS cells. In both these circumstances, it’s
a real challenge to completely reset the epigenome of the adult nucleus.
It’s just too big a task.

This is probably why so many cloned animals have abnormalities and
shortened lifespans. The defects that are seen in these cloned animals
are another demonstration that if early epigenetic modifications go
wrong, they may stay wrong for life. The abnormal epigenetic
modification patterns result in permanently inappropriate gene
expression, and long-term ill-health.

All this reprogramming of the genome in normal early development changes
the epigenome of the gametes and creates the new epigenome of the
zygote. This ensures that the gene expression patterns of eggs and sperm
are replaced by the gene expression patterns of the zygote and the
subsequent developmental stages. But this reprogramming also has another
effect. Cells can accumulate inappropriate or abnormal epigenetic
modifications at various genes. These disrupt normal gene expression and
can even contribute to disease, as we shall see later in this book. The
reprogramming of the egg and the sperm prevent them from passing on from
parent to offspring any inappropriate epigenetic modifications they have
accumulated. Not so much wiping the slate clean, more like re-installing
the operating system.

Making the switch

 

But this creates a paradox. Azim Surani’s experiments showed that the
male and female pro-nuclei aren’t functionally equivalent; we need one
of each to create a new mammal. This is known as a parent-of-origin
effect, because it essentially shows that there are ways for a zygote
and its daughter cells to distinguish between chromosomes from the
mother and father. This isn’t a genetic effect, it is an epigenetic one,
and so there must be some epigenetic modifications that do get
transmitted from one generation to the next.

In 1987 the Surani lab published one of the first papers to give an
insight into this mechanism. They hypothesised that parent-of-origin
effects could be caused by DNA methylation. At that time, this was
really the only chromatin modification that had been identified, so it
was an excellent place to start. The researchers created genetically
modified mice. These mice contained an extra piece of DNA that could get
inserted randomly anywhere in the genome. The DNA sequence of this extra
bit wasn’t particularly important to the experimenters. What was
important was that they could easily measure how much DNA methylation
was present on this sequence, and whether the amount of methylation was
transmitted faithfully from parent to offspring.

Azim Surani and his colleagues examined seven lines of mice with this
random insertion. In one of the seven lines, something very odd
happened. When a mother passed on the inserted DNA, it was always
heavily methylated in her offspring. But when a male mouse passed it on
to his offspring, the mouse pups always ended up with low methylation of
this foreign DNA. Figure 7.3 demonstrates this.

[Fig-16.eps]

 

Figure 7.3 Mice generated in which a particular foreign piece of DNA was
either methylated or not methylated. Black represents methylated DNA,
and white represents unmethylated. When a mother passed on this foreign
DNA, the DNA was always heavily methylated (black) in her offspring,
regardless of whether she herself had been ‘black’ or ‘white’. The
opposite was found for males, whose offspring always had unmethylated
‘white’ DNA. This was the first experimental demonstration that some
regions of the genome can be marked to indicate if they were inherited
via the maternal or the paternal line.

 

Black represents the methylated inserted DNA, whereas white represents
unmethylated DNA. Fathers always give their offspring white,
unmethylated DNA whereas mothers always give their offspring black,
methylated DNA. In other words, the methylation in the offspring is
dependent on the sex of the parent who passed the inserted DNA onto
them. It’s not dependent on what the methylation was like in the parent.
For example, a ‘black’ male will always have offspring with ‘white’ DNA.

What this paper from Azim Surani7, and another published at the same
time8, demonstrated was that when mammals create eggs and sperm, they
somehow manage to barcode the DNA in these cells. It’s as if the
chromosomes carry little flags. The chromosomes in sperm carry little
flags that say, ‘I’m from Dad’ and the chromosomes in eggs carry little
flags that say, ‘I’m from Mum’. DNA methylation is the fabric that these
flags are made from.

The description that is used for this is imprinting – the chromosomes
have been imprinted with information about which parent they came from
originally. Imprinting and parent-of-origin effects are something we
will explore in more detail in the next chapter.

What was happening to the foreign DNA in the experiments, which kept
changing its methylation status as it was transmitted from parent to
offspring? It had, quite by chance, got inserted into a region of the
mouse DNA that carried one of these flags. As a consequence, the foreign
DNA also started getting DNA methylation flags stuck to it when it was
passed down the generations.

The fact that only one of seven mouse lines showed this effect suggested
that not all of the genome carries these flags. If the whole genome was
marked in this way, we would have expected that all the lines that were
tested would show the effect. In fact, the one in seven rate suggests
that these flagged regions are the exception, not the rule.

In Chapter 6 we saw that sometimes animals do inherit acquired
characteristics from their parents. The work of Emma Whitelaw, amongst
others, shows us that some epigenetic modifications do indeed get passed
between parent and offspring, via the sperm and the egg. This type of
inheritance is pretty rare, but it does strengthen our belief that there
must be some epigenetic modifications that are special. They don’t get
replaced when the egg and sperm fuse to form the zygote. So, although
the vast majority of the mammalian genome does get reset when the egg
and the sperm fuse, a small percentage of it is immune from this
reprogramming.

The epigenetics arms race

 

Only 2 per cent of our genome codes for proteins. A massive 42 per cent
is composed of retrotransposons. These are very odd sequences of DNA,
which probably originated from viruses in our evolutionary past. Some
retrotransposons are transcribed to produce RNA and this can affect the
expression of neighbouring genes. This can have serious consequences for
cells. If it drives up expression of genes that cause cells to
proliferate too aggressively, for example, this may nudge cells towards
becoming cancerous.

There’s a constant arms race in evolution, and mechanisms have evolved
in our cells to control the activity of these types of retrotransposons.
One of the major mechanisms that cells use is epigenetic. The
retrotransposon DNA gets methylated by the cell, turning off
retrotransposon RNA expression. This prevents the RNA disrupting
expression of neighbouring genes. One particular class, known as IAP
retrotransposons, seems to be a particular target of this control
mechanism.

During reprogramming in the early zygote, the methylation is removed
from most of our DNA. But IAP retrotransposons are an exception to this.
The reprogramming machinery has evolved to skip these rogue elements and
leave the DNA methylation marks on them. This keeps the retrotransposons
in an epigenetically repressed state. This has probably evolved as a
mechanism to reduce the risk that potentially dangerous IAP
retrotransposons will get accidentally re-activated.

This is relevant because the two best-studied examples of
transgenerational inheritance of non-genetic features are the agouti
mouse and the AxinFu mouse, which we met in the previous chapter. The
phenotypes in both these models are a consequence of the methylation
levels of an IAP retrotransposon upstream of a gene. The DNA methylation
levels in the parent get passed on to the offspring, and so does the
phenotype caused by the expression levels of the retrotransposon9.

We met other examples of transgenerational inheritance of acquired
characteristics in Chapter 6, including the effects of nutrition on
subsequent generations, and the transgenerational effects of
environmental pollutants such as vinclozolin. Researchers are exploring
the hypothesis that these environmental stimuli create epigenetic
changes in the chromatin of the gametes. These alterations are probably
in regions that are protected from reprogramming during early
development after the egg and sperm fuse.

Like John Gurdon, Azim Surani has continued to work highly productively
in a field that he pioneered. His work has been focused on how and why
eggs and sperm barcode their DNA so that a molecular memory is passed on
to the next generation. A large amount of Azim Surani’s initial
pioneering work was dependent on manipulating mammalian nuclei by using
tiny pipettes to transfer them between cells. Technically, this is a
refined version of the methods that John Gurdon used so successfully
fifteen years earlier. It’s oddly pleasing to consider that Professor
Surani is now based at the research institute in Cambridge that is named
after Professor Gurdon, and that they frequently bump into each other in
the corridors and the coffee room.

  Chapter 8

 

  The Battle of the Sexes

 

  Nobody will ever win the Battle of the Sexes. There’s just too much
  fraternising with the enemy.

  Henry Kissinger

 

The laboratory stick insect Carausius morosus is a very popular pet. As
long as it has a few privet leaves to munch on it will be perfectly
content, and after a few months it will begin to lay eggs. In due
course, these will hatch into perfect little baby stick insects, looking
just like miniature versions of the adults. If one of these baby stick
insects is removed as soon as it is born, and kept in a tank on its own,
then it too will lay eggs which will hatch into little stick insects in
their turn. This is despite the fact that it has never mated.

Stick insects frequently reproduce this way. They are using a mechanism
known as parthenogenesis, from the Greek for ‘virgin birth’. Females lay
fertile eggs without ever mating with a male, and perfectly healthy
little stick insects emerge from these eggs. These insects have evolved
with special mechanisms to ensure that the offspring have the correct
number of chromosomes. But these chromosomes all came from the mother.

This is very different from mice and humans, as we saw in the last
chapter. For us and our rodent relatives, the only way to generate live
young is by having DNA from both a mother and a father. It’s tempting to
speculate that stick insects are highly unusual but they’re not. We
mammals are the exceptions. Insects, fish, amphibians, reptiles and even
birds all have a few species that can reproduce parthenogenetically.
It’s we mammals who can’t. It’s our class in the animal kingdom which is
the odd one out, so it makes sense to ask why this is the case. We can
begin by looking at the features which are found only in mammals. Well,
we have hair, and we have three bones in our middle ear. Neither of
these characteristics is found in the other classes, but it seems
unlikely these are the key features that have led us to abandon virgin
birth. For this issue there is a much more important characteristic.

The most primitive examples of mammals are the small number of creatures
like the duck-billed platypus and the echidna, which lay eggs. After
them, in terms of reproductive complexity, are the marsupials such as
the kangaroo and the Tasmanian devil, which give birth to very
under-developed young. The young of these species go through most of
their developmental stages outside the mother’s body, in her pouch. The
pouch is a glorified pocket on the outside of the body.

By far the greatest numbers of our class are called placental (or
eutherian) mammals. Humans, tigers, mice, blue whales – we all nourish
our young in the same way. Our offspring undergo a really long
developmental phase inside the mother, in the uterus. During this
developmental stage, the young get their nourishment via the placenta.
This large, pancake-shaped structure acts as an interface between the
blood system of the foetus and the blood system of the mother. Blood
doesn’t actually flow from one to the other. Instead the two blood
systems pass so closely to one another that nutrients such as sugars,
vitamins, minerals and amino acids can pass from the mother to the
foetus. Oxygen also passes from the mother’s blood to the foetal blood
supply. In exchange, the foetus gets rid of waste gases and other
potentially harmful toxins by passing them back into the mother’s
circulation.

It’s a very impressive system, and allows mammals to nurture their young
for long periods during early development. A new placenta is created in
each pregnancy and the code for its production isn’t carried by the
mother. It’s all coded for by the foetus. Think back yet again to our
model of the early blastocyst in Chapter 2. All the cells of the
blastocyst are descendants of the fertilised single-cell zygote. The
cells that will ultimately become the placenta are the tennis ball cells
on the outside of the blastocyst. In fact, one of the earliest decisions
that cells make as they begin to roll down Waddington’s epigenetic
landscape is whether they are turning into future placental cells, or
future body cells.

We can’t escape our (evolutionary) past

 

While the placenta is a great method for nourishing a foetus, the system
has ‘issues’. To use business or political speech, there’s a conflict of
interest, because in evolutionary terms, our bodies are faced with a
dilemma.

This is the evolutionary imperative for the male mammal, phrased
anthropomorphically:

  This pregnant female is carrying my genes in the form of this foetus.
  I may never mate with her again. I want my foetus to get as big as
  possible so that it has the greatest chance of passing on my genes.

For the female mammal, the evolutionary imperative is rather different:

  I want this foetus to survive and pass on my genes. But I don’t want
  it to be at the cost of draining me so much that I never reproduce
  again. I want more than this one chance to pass on my genes.

This battle of the sexes in mammals has reached an evolutionary Mexican
stand-off. A series of checks and balances ensures that neither the
maternal nor the paternal genome gets the upper hand. We can get a
better understanding of how this works if we look once again at the
experiments of Azim Surani, Davor Sobel and Bruce Cattanach. These are
the scientists who created the mouse zygotes that contained only
paternal DNA or only maternal DNA.

After they had created these test tube zygotes, the scientists implanted
them into the uterus of mice. None of the labs ever generated living
mice from these zygotes. However, the zygotes did develop for a while in
the womb, but very abnormally. The abnormal development was quite
different, depending on whether all the chromosomes had come from the
mother or the father.

In both cases the few embryos that did form were small and retarded in
growth. Where all the chromosomes had come from the mother, the
placental tissues were very underdeveloped1. If all the chromosomes came
from the father, the embryo was even more retarded but there was much
better production of the placental tissues2. Scientists created embryos
from a mix of these cells – cells which had only maternally inherited or
paternally inherited chromosomes. These embryos still couldn’t develop
all the way to birth. When examined, the researchers found that all the
tissues in the embryo were from the maternal-only cells whereas the
cells of the placental tissues were the paternal-only type3.

All these data suggested that something in the male chromosomes pushes
the developmental programme in favour of the placenta, whereas a
maternally-derived genome has less of a drive towards the placenta, and
more towards the embryo itself. How is this consistent with the conflict
or evolutionary imperative laid out earlier in this chapter? Well, the
placenta is the portal for taking nutrients out of the mother and
transferring them into the foetus. The paternally-derived chromosomes
promote placental development, and thereby create mechanisms for
diverting as much nutrition as possible from the mother’s bloodstream.
The maternal chromosomes act in the opposite way, and a finely poised
stalemate develops in normal pregnancies.

One obvious question is whether all the chromosomes are important for
these effects. Bruce Cattanach used complex genetic experiments on mice
to investigate this. The mice contained chromosomes that had been
rearranged in different ways. The simplest way to explain this is that
each mouse had the right amount of chromosomes, but they’d been ‘stuck
together’ in unusual ways. He was able to create mice which had precise
abnormalities in the inheritance of their chromosomes. For example, he
could create mice which inherited both copies of a specific chromosome
from just one parent.

The first experiments he reported were using mouse chromosome 11. For
all the other pairs of chromosomes, the mice inherited one of each pair
maternally, and one paternally. But for chromosome 11, Bruce Cattanach
created mice that had inherited two copies from their mother and none
from their father, or vice versa. Figure 8.1 represents the results4.

[Fig-17.eps]

 

Figure 8.1 Bruce Cattanach created genetically modified mice, in which
he could control how they inherited a particular region of chromosome
11. The middle mouse inherited one copy from each parent. Mice which
inherited both copies from their mother were smaller than this normal
mouse. In contrast, mice which inherited both copies from their father
were larger than normal.

 

Once again this is consistent with the idea that there are factors in
the paternal chromosomes that push towards development of larger
offspring. Factors in the maternal chromosomes either act in the
‘opposite direction’ or are broadly neutral.

As we explored in the last chapter, these factors are epigenetic, not
genetic. In the example above, let’s assume that the parents came from
the same inbred mouse strain, so were genetically identical. If you
sequenced both copies of chromosome 11 in any of the three types of
offspring, they would be exactly the same. They would contain the same
millions of A, C, G and T base-pairs, in the same order. But the two
copies of chromosome 11 do clearly behave differently at a functional
level, as shown by the different sizes of the different types of mice.
Therefore there must be epigenetic differences between the maternal and
paternal copies of chromosome 11.

Sex discrimination

 

Because the two copies of the chromosome behave differently depending on
their parent-of-origin, chromosome 11 is known as an imprinted
chromosome. It has been imprinted with information about its origins. As
our understanding of genetics has improved we’ve realised that only
certain stretches of chromosome 11 are imprinted. There are large
regions where it doesn’t matter at all which parent donated which
chromosome, and the regions from the two parents are functionally
equivalent. There are also entire chromosomes that are not imprinted.

So far, we’ve described imprinting in mainly phenomenological terms.
Imprinted regions are stretches of the genome where we can detect
parent-of-origin effects in offspring. But how do these regions carry
this effect? In imprinted regions, certain genes are switched on or
switched off, depending on how they were inherited. In the chromosome 11
example above, genes associated with placental growth are switched on
and are very active in the copy of the chromosome inherited from the
father. This carries risks of nutrient depletion for the mother who is
carrying the foetus, and a compensatory mechanism has evolved. The
copies of these same genes on the maternal chromosome tend to be
switched off, and this limits the placental growth. Alternatively, there
may be other genes that counterbalance the effects of the paternal
genes, and these counter-balancing genes may be expressed mainly from
the maternal chromosome.

Major strides have been made in understanding the molecular biology of
these effects. For example, later researchers worked on a region on
chromosome 7 in mice. There is a gene in this region called insulin-like
growth factor 2 (Igf2). The Igf2 protein promotes embryonic growth, and
is normally expressed only from the paternally-derived copy of
chromosome 7. Experimenters introduced a mutation into this gene, which
stopped the gene coding for a functional Igf2 protein. They studied the
effects of the mutation on offspring. When the mutation was passed on
from the mother, the young mice looked the same as any other mice. This
is because the Igf2 gene is normally switched off on the maternal
chromosome anyway, and so it didn’t matter that the maternal gene was
mutated. But when the mutant Igf2 gene was passed down from father to
offspring, the mice in the litter were much smaller than usual. This was
because the one copy of the Igf2 gene that they ‘relied on’ for strong
foetal growth had been switched off by the mutation5.

There is a gene on mouse chromosome 17 called Igf2r. The protein encoded
by this gene ‘mops up’ Igf2 protein and stops it acting as a growth
promoter. The Igf2r gene is also imprinted. Because Igf2r protein has
the ‘opposite’ effect to Igf2 in terms of foetal growth, it probably
isn’t surprising to learn that the Igf2r gene is usually expressed from
the maternal copy of chromosome 176.

Scientists have detected about 100 imprinted genes in mice, and about
half this number in humans. It’s not clear if there are genuinely fewer
imprinted genes in humans than in mice, or if it’s just more difficult
to detect them experimentally. Imprinting evolved about 150 million
years ago7, and it really only occurs to a great extent in placental
mammals. It isn’t found in those classes that can reproduce
parthenogenetically.

Imprinting is a complicated system, and like all complex machinery, it
can break down. We now know that there are disorders in humans that are
caused by problems with the imprinting mechanism.

When imprinting goes bad

 

Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is named after two of the authors of the
first description of the condition8. PWS affects about one in 20,000
live births. The babies have a low birth weight and their muscles are
really floppy. In early infancy, it can be difficult to feed these
babies and initially they fail to thrive. This is dramatically reversed
by early childhood. The children are constantly hungry, so over-eat to
an incredible degree and can become dangerously obese. Along with other
characteristic features such as small feet and hands, delayed language
development and infertility, the individuals with PWS are often mildly
or moderately mentally retarded. They may also have behavioural
disturbances, including inappropriate temper outbursts9.

There’s another disorder in humans that affects about the same number of
people as PWS. This is called Angelman syndrome (AS), and like PWS it is
named after the person who first described the condition10. Children
with AS suffer from severe mental retardation, small brain size and very
little speech. Patients with AS will often laugh spontaneously for no
obvious reason, which led to the spectacularly insensitive clinical
description of these children as ‘happy puppets’11.

In both PWS and AS, the parents of the affected children are normally
perfectly healthy. Research suggested that the basic problem in each of
these conditions was likely to be caused by an underlying defect in the
chromosomes. Because the parents were unaffected, the defect probably
arose during the production of the eggs or the sperm.

In the 1980s, researchers working on PWS used a variety of standard
techniques to find the underlying cause of this condition. They looked
for regions of the genome that were different between healthy children
and those with the disorder. Scientists interested in AS were doing
something similar. By the mid-1980s it was becoming clear that both
groups were looking at the same part of the genome, a specific stretch
on chromosome 15. In both PWS and AS, patients had lost a small,
identical section of this chromosome.

But these two disorders are very unlike each other in their clinical
presentation. Nobody would ever confuse a patient with PWS with one who
was suffering from Angelman’s syndrome. How could the same genetic
problem – the loss of a key region of chromosome 15 – result in such
different symptoms?

In 1989 a group from The Children’s Hospital, Boston, showed that the
important feature was not just the deletion, but how the deletion was
inherited. It’s summarised in Figure 8.2. When the abnormal chromosome
was inherited from the father, the child had PWS. When the same
chromosome abnormality was inherited from the mother, the child had
AS12.

[Fig-18.eps]

 

Figure 8.2 Two children may each have the same deletion on
chromosome 15, shown schematically by the absence of the horizontally
striped box. The phenotype of the two children will be different,
depending on how they inherited the abnormal chromosome. If the abnormal
chromosome was inherited from their father, the child will develop
Prader-Willi syndrome. If the abnormal chromosome was inherited from
their mother, the child will develop Angelman syndrome, which is a very
different disorder from Prader-Willi.

 

This is a clear case of epigenetic inheritance of a disorder. Children
with PWS and AS had exactly the same problem genetically – they were
missing a specific region of chromosome 15. The only difference was how
they inherited the abnormal chromosome. This is another example of a
parent-of-origin effect.

There’s another way in which patients can inherit PWS or AS. Some
patients with these disorders have two totally normal copies of
chromosome 15. There are no deletions, and no other mutations of any
type, and yet the children develop the conditions. To understand how
this can be, it’s helpful to think back to the mice who inherited both
copies of chromosome 11 from one parent. Some of the same researchers
who unravelled the story of the PWS deletion showed that in certain
examples of this condition, the children have two normal copies of
chromosome 15. The trouble is, they’ve inherited both from their mother,
and none from their father. This is known as uniparental disomy – one
parent contributing two chromosomes13. In 1991, a team from the
Institute of Child Health in London showed that some cases of AS were
caused by the opposite form of uniparental disomy to PWS. The children
had two normal copies of chromosome 15, but had inherited both from
their father14.

This reinforced the notion that PWS and AS are each examples of
epigenetic diseases. The children with uniparental disomy of chromosome
15 had inherited exactly the right amount of DNA, they just hadn’t
inherited it from each parent. Their cells contained all the correct
genes, in all the correct amounts, and yet still they suffered from
these severe disorders.

It’s important that we inherit this fairly small region of chromosome 15
in the right way because this region is normally imprinted. There are
genes in this region that are only expressed from either the maternal or
the paternal chromosome. One of these genes is called UBE3A. This gene
is important for normal functioning in the brain, but it’s only
expressed from the maternally inherited gene in this tissue. But what if
a child doesn’t inherit a copy of UBE3A from its mother? This could
happen if both copies of UBE3A came from the father, because of
uniparental disomy of chromosome 15. Alternatively, the child might
inherit a copy of chromosome 15 from its mother which lacked the UBE3A
gene, because part of the chromosome had been lost. In these cases, the
child can’t express UBE3A protein in its brain, and this leads to the
development of the symptoms of Angelman syndrome.

Conversely, there are genes that are normally only expressed from the
paternal version of this stretch of chromosome 15. This includes a gene
called SNORD116, but others may also be important. The same scenario
applies as for UBE3A, but replace the word maternal with paternal. If a
child doesn’t inherit this region of chromosome 15 from its father, it
develops Prader-Willi syndrome.

There are other examples of imprinting disorders in humans. The most
famous is called Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, again named after the
people who first described it in the medical literature15,16. This
disorder is characterised by over-growth of tissues, so that the babies
are born with over-developed muscles including the tongue, and a range
of other symptoms17. This condition has a slightly different mechanism
to the ones described above. When imprinting goes wrong in
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, both the maternal and paternal copies of a
gene on chromosome 11 get switched on, when normally only the
paternally-derived version should be expressed. The key gene seems to be
IGF2, which codes for the growth factor protein that we met earlier, on
mouse chromosome 7. By expressing two copies of this gene, rather than
just one, twice as much IGF2 protein as normal is produced and the
foetus grows too much.

The opposite phenotype to Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome is a condition
called Silver-Russell syndrome18,19. Children with this disorder are
characterised by retarded growth before and after birth and other
symptoms associated with late development20. Most cases of this
condition are also caused by problems in the same region of chromosome
11 as in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, but in Silver-Russell syndrome
IGF2 protein expression is depressed, and the growth of the foetus is
dampened down.

The epigenetic imprint

 

So, imprinting refers to a situation where there is expression of only
one member of a pair of genes, and the expression may be either maternal
or paternal. What controls which gene is switched on? It probably isn’t
surprising to learn that DNA methylation plays a really big role in
this. DNA methylation switches genes off. Therefore, if a
paternally-inherited region of a chromosome is methylated, the
paternally-derived genes in this region will be repressed.

Let’s take the example of the UBE3A gene which we encountered in the
discussion of Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes. Normally, the copy
inherited from the father contains methylated DNA and the gene is
switched off. The copy inherited from the mother doesn’t have this
methylation mark, and the gene is switched on. Something similar happens
with Igf2r in mice. The paternal version of this is usually methylated,
and the gene is inactive. The maternal version is non-methylated and the
gene is expressed.

While a role for DNA methylation may not have come as a shock, it may be
surprising to learn that it is often not the gene body that is
methylated. The part of the gene that codes for protein is
epigenetically broadly the same when we compare the maternal and
paternal copies of the chromosome. It’s the region of the chromosome
that controls the expression of the gene that is differently methylated
between the two genomes.

Imagine a night-time summer party in a friend’s garden, beautifully lit
by candles scattered between the plants. Unfortunately, this lovely
ambience is constantly ruined because the movement of the guests keeps
triggering a motion detector on a security system and turning on a
floodlight. The floodlight is too high on the wall to be able to cover
it, but finally it dawns on the guests that they don’t need to cover the
light. They need to cover the sensor that is triggering the light’s
activity. This is very much what happens in imprinting.

The methylation, or lack of it, is on regions known as imprinting
control regions (ICRs). In some cases, imprinting control is very
straightforward to understand. The promoter region of a gene is
methylated on the gene inherited from one parent, and not on the one
from the other. This methylation keeps a gene switched off. This works
when there is a single gene in a chromosome region that is imprinted.
But many imprinted genes are arranged in clusters, all very close to one
another in a single stretch on one chromosome. Some of the genes in the
cluster will be expressed from the maternally-derived chromosome, others
from the paternally-derived one. DNA methylation is still the key
feature, but other factors help it to carry out its function.

The imprinting control region may operate over long distances, and
certain stretches may bind large proteins. These proteins act like
roadblocks in a city, insulating different stretches on a chromosome
from one another. This gives the imprinting process an additional level
of sophistication, by inserting diversions between different genes.
Because of this, an imprinting control region may operate over many
thousands of base-pairs, but it doesn’t mean that every single gene in
those thousands of base-pairs is affected the same way. Different genes
in a particular imprinted stretch of chromatin may loop out from their
chromosome to form physical associations with each other, so that
repressed genes huddle together in a sort of chromatin knot. Activated
genes from the same stretch of chromosome may cling together in a
different bundle21.

The impact of imprinting varies from tissue to tissue. The placenta is
particularly rich in expression of imprinted genes. This is what we
would expect from our model of imprinting as a means of balancing out
the demand on maternal resources. The brain also appears to be very
susceptible to imprinting effects. It’s not so clear why this should be
the case. It’s harder to reconcile parent-of-origin control of gene
expression in the brain with the battle for nutrients we’ve been
considering so far. Professor Gudrun Moore of University College London
has made an intriguing suggestion. She has proposed that the high levels
of imprinting in the brain represent a post-natal continuation of the
war of the sexes. She has speculated that some brain imprints are an
attempt by the paternal genome to promote behaviour in young offspring
that will stimulate the mother to continue to drain her own resources,
for example by prolonged breast-feeding22.

The number of imprinted genes is quite low, rather less than 1 per cent
of all protein-coding genes. Even this small percentage won’t be
imprinted in all tissues. In many cells the expression from the
maternally and paternally-derived copies will be the same. This is not
because the methylation pattern is different between the tissues but
because cells vary in the ways that they ‘read’ this methylation.

The DNA methylation patterns on the imprinting control regions are
present in all the cells of the body, and show which parent transmitted
which copy of a chromosome. This tells us something very revealing about
imprinted regions. They must evade the reprogramming that takes place
after the sperm and egg fuse to form the zygote. Otherwise, the
methylation modifications would be stripped off and there would be no
way for the cell to work out which parent had donated which chromosome.
Just as the IAP retrotransposons stay methylated during zygotic
reprogramming, mechanisms have evolved to protect imprinted regions from
this broad-brush removal of methylation. It’s not really very clear how
this happens, but it’s essential for normal development and health.

You put your imprint on, you take your imprint off …

 

Yet this presents us with a bit of a problem. If imprinted DNA
methylation marks are so stable, how do they change as they are
transmitted from parent to offspring? We know that they do, because of
Azim Surani’s experiments with mice that we encountered in the previous
chapter. These showed how methylation of a sequence monitored for
experimental purposes changed as it was passed down the generations.
This was the experiment that was described using the mice with ‘black’
and ‘white’ DNA in the previous chapter.

In fact, once scientists recognised that parent-of-origin effects exist,
they predicted that there must be a way to reset the epigenetic marks,
even before they knew what these marks were. Let’s consider chromosome
15, for example. I inherited one copy from my mother and one from my
father. The UBE3A imprinting control region from my mother was
unmethylated, whereas the same region on the chromosome from my father
was methylated. This ensured appropriate expression patterns of UBE3A
protein in my brain.

When my ovaries produce eggs, each egg inherits just one copy of
chromosome 15, which I will pass on to a child. Because I’m a woman,
each copy of chromosome 15 must carry a maternal mark on UBE3A. But one
of my copies of chromosome 15 has been carrying the paternally-derived
mark I inherited from my father. The only way I can make sure that I
pass on chromosome 15 with the correct maternal mark to my children is
if my cells have a way of removing the paternal mark and replacing it
with a maternal one.

A very similar process would have to take place when males produce
sperm. All maternally-derived modifications would need to be stripped
off the imprinted genes, and paternally derived ones put on in their
place. This is indeed exactly what happens. It’s a very restricted
process which only takes place in the cells that give rise to the germ
line.

The general principle is shown diagrammatically in Figure 8.3.

Following fusion of the egg and sperm the blastocyst forms, and most
regions of the genome become reprogrammed. The cells begin to
differentiate, forming the precursors to the placenta and also the
various cell types of the body. So, at this point the cells that had
been part of the ICM are all marching to the developmental drumbeat,
heading down the various troughs in Waddington’s epigenetic landscape.
But a very small number (less than 100) begin to march to a different
beat. In these cells a gene called Blimp1 switches on. Blimp1 protein
sets up a new cascade in signalling, which stops the cells heading
towards their somatic dead-ends. These cells start travelling back up
Waddington’s trenches23. They also lose the imprinted marks which told
the cell which parent donated which of a pair of chromosomes.

[Fig-19.eps]

 

Figure 8.3 Diagram showing how the somatic cells arising from a
fertilised zygote all carry the same DNA methylation patterns as each
other at imprinted genes, but the imprinting methylation is removed and
then re-established in the germ cells. This ensures that females only
pass on maternal marks to their offspring, and males only pass on
paternal ones.

 

The tiny population of cells that carry out this process are know as the
primordial germ cells. It’s these cells that will ultimately settle in
the developing gonads (testicles or ovaries) and act as the stem cells
that produce all the gametes (sperm or eggs respectively). In the stage
described in the previous paragraph, the primordial germ cells are
reverting to a state more like that of the cells of the inner cell mass
(ICM). Essentially, they are becoming pluripotent, and potentially able
to code for most of the tissue types in the body. This phase is
fleeting. The primordial germ cells quickly get diverted into a new
developmental pathway where they differentiate to form stem cells that
will give rise to eggs or sperm. To do so, they gain a new set of
epigenetic modifications. Some of these modifications are ones that
define cellular identity, i.e. switch on the genes that make an egg an
egg. But a small number are the ones that serve as parent-of-origin
marks, so that in the next generation the imprinted regions of the
genome can be recognised with respect to their parent-of-origin.

This seems horribly complicated. If we follow the path from the sperm
that fertilised the egg to a new sperm being formed in male offspring,
the sequence goes like this:

1.  The sperm that enters the egg has epigenetic modifications on it;
2.  The epigenetic modifications get taken off, except at the imprinted
    regions (in the immediate post-fertilisation zygote);
3.  Epigenetic modifications get put on (as the cells of the ICM begin
    to specialise);
4.  The epigenetic modifications get taken off, including at the
    imprinted regions (as the primordial germ cells break away from the
    somatic differentiation pathway);
5.  Epigenetic modifications get put on (as the sperm develops).

This could seem like an unnecessarily complicated way to get back to
where we started from, but it’s essential.

The modifications that make a sperm a sperm, or an egg an egg, have to
come off at stage 2 or the zygote wouldn’t be totipotent. Instead it
would have a genome that was half-programmed to be an egg and
half-programmed to be a sperm. Development wouldn’t be possible if the
inherited modifications stayed on. But to create primordial germ cells,
some of the cells from the differentiating ICM have to lose their
epigenetic modifications. This is so they can become temporarily more
pluripotent, lose their imprinting marks and transfer across into the
germ cell lineage.

Once the primordial germ cells have been diverted, epigenetic
modifications again get attached to the genome. This is partly because
pluripotent cells are potentially extremely dangerous as a
multi-cellular organism develops. It might seem like a great idea to
have cells in our body that can divide repeatedly and give rise to lots
of other cell types, but it’s not. Those sorts of cells are the type
that we find in cancer. Evolution has favoured a mechanism where the
primordial germ cells can regain pluripotency for a period, but then
this pluripotency is re-suppressed by epigenetic modifications. Coupled
with this, the wiping out of the imprints means that chromosomes can be
marked afresh with their parent-of-origin.

Occasionally this process of setting up the new imprints on the
progenitors of egg or sperm can go wrong. There are cases of Angelman
syndrome and Prader-Willi syndrome where the imprint has not been
properly erased during the primordial germ cell stage24. For example, a
woman may generate eggs where chromosome 15 still has the paternal mark
on it that she inherited from her father, rather than the correct
maternal mark. When this egg is fertilised by a sperm, both copies of
chromosome 15 will function like paternal chromosomes, and create a
phenotype just like uniparental disomy.

Research is ongoing into how all these processes are controlled. We
don’t fully understand how imprints are protected from reprogramming
following fusion of the egg and the sperm, nor how they lose this
protection during the primordial germ cell stage. We’re also not
entirely sure how imprints get put back on in the right place. The
picture is still quite foggy, although details are starting to emerge
from the haze.

Part of this may involve the small percentage of histones that are
present in the sperm genome. Many of these are located at the imprinting
control regions, and may protect these regions from reprogramming when
the sperm and the egg fuse25. Histone modifications also play a role in
establishing ‘new’ imprints during gamete production. It seems to be
important that the imprinting control regions lose any histone
modifications that are associated with switching genes on. Only then can
the permanent DNA methylation be added26. It’s this permanent DNA
methylation that marks a gene with a repressive imprint.

Dolly and her daughters

 

The reprogramming events in the zygote and in primordial germ cells
impact on a surprising number of epigenetic phenomena. When somatic
cells are reprogrammed in the laboratory using the Yamanaka factors,
only a tiny percentage of them form iPS cells. Hardly any seem to be
exactly the same as ES cells, the genuinely pluripotent cells from the
inner cell mass of the blastocyst. A group in Boston, based at
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard University, assessed
genetically identical iPS and ES cells from mice. They looked for genes
that varied in expression between the two types of cells. The only major
differences in expression were in a chromosomal region known as
Dlk1-Dio327. A few iPS cells expressed the genes in this region in a way
that was very similar to how the ES cell did this. These were the best
iPS cells for forming all the different tissues of the body.

Dlk1-Dio3 is an imprinted region on chromosome 12 of the mouse. It’s
perhaps not surprising that an imprinted region turned out to be so
important. The Yamanaka technique triggers the reprogramming process
that normally occurs when a sperm fuses with an egg. Imprinted regions
of the genome are resistant to reprogramming in normal development. It
is likely that they present too high a barrier to reprogramming in the
very artificial environment of the Yamanaka method.

The Dlk1-Dio3 region has been of interest to researchers for quite some
time. In humans, uniparental disomy in this region is associated with
growth and developmental defects, amongst other symptoms28. This region
has also been shown to be critical for the prevention of
parthenogenesis, at least in mice. Researchers from Japan and South
Korea genetically manipulated just this region of the genome in mice.
They reconstructed a fertilised egg with two female pronuclei. The
Dlk1-Dio3 region in one of the pronuclei had been altered so that it
carried the equivalent of a paternal rather than maternal imprint. The
live mice that were born were the first example of a placental mammal
with two maternal genomes29.

The reprogramming that occurs in the primordial germ cells isn’t
completely comprehensive. It leaves the methylation on some IAP
retrotransposons more or less intact. The DNA methylation level of the
AxinFu retrotransposon in sperm is the same as it is in the body cells
of this strain of mice. This shows that the DNA methylation was not
removed when the PGCs were reprogrammed, even though most other areas of
the genome did lose this modification. This resistance of the AxinFu
retrotransposon to both rounds of epigenetic reprogramming (in the
zygote and in the primordial germ cells) provides a mechanism for the
transgenerational inheritance of the kinked tail trait that we met in
earlier chapters.

We know that not all transgenerational inheritance happens in the same
way. In the agouti mouse the phenotype is transmitted via the mother,
but not via the father. In this case, the DNA methylation on the IAP
retrotransposon is removed in both males and females during normal
primordial germ cell reprogramming. However, mothers whose
retrotransposon originally carried DNA methylation pass on a specific
histone mark to their offspring. This is a repressive histone
modification and it acts as a signal to the DNA methylation machinery.
This signal attracts the enzymes that put the repressive DNA methylation
onto a specific region on a chromosome. The final outcome is the same –
the DNA methylation in the mother is restored in the offspring. Male
agouti mice don’t pass on either DNA methylation or repressive histone
modifications on their retrotransposon, which is why transmission of the
phenotype only occurs through the maternal line30.

This is a slightly more indirect method of transmitting epigenetic
information. Instead of direct carry-over of DNA methylation, an
intermediate surrogate (a repressive histone modification) is used
instead. This is probably why the maternal transmission of the agouti
phenotype is a bit ‘fuzzy’. Not all offspring are exactly the same as
the mother, because there is a bit of ‘wriggle-room’ in how DNA
methylation gets re-established in the offspring.

In the summer of 2010, there were reports in the British press about
cloned farm animals. Meat that had come from the offspring of a cloned
cow had entered the human food chain31. Not the cloned cow itself, just
its offspring, created by conventional animal breeding. Although there
were a few alarmist stories about people unwittingly eating
‘Frankenfoods’, the coverage in the mainstream media was pretty
balanced.

To some extent, this was probably because of a quite intriguing
phenomenon, which has allayed certain fears originally held by
scientists about the consequences of cloning. When cloned animals breed,
the offspring tend to be healthier than the original clones. This is
almost certainly because of primordial germ cell reprogramming. The
initial clone was formed by transfer of a somatic nucleus into an egg.
This nucleus only went through the first round of reprogramming, the one
that normally happens when a sperm fertilises an egg. The likelihood is
that this epigenetic reprogramming wasn’t entirely effective – it’s a
big ask to get an egg to reprogram a ‘wrong’ nucleus. This is likely to
be the reason why clones tend to be unhealthy.

When the cloned animals breed, they pass on either an egg or a sperm.
Before the clone produced these gametes, its primordial cells underwent
the second round of reprogramming, as part of the normal primordial germ
cell pathway. This second reprogramming stage seems to reset the
epigenome properly. The gametes lose the abnormal epigenetic
modifications of their cloned parent. Epigenetics explains why cloned
animals have health issues, but also explains why their offspring don’t.
In fact, the offspring are essentially indistinguishable from animals
produced naturally.

Assisted reproductive technologies in humans (such as in vitro
fertilisation) share certain technical aspects with some of the methods
used in cloning. In particular, pluripotent nuclei may be transferred
between cells, and cells are cultured in the laboratory before being
implanted in the uterus. There is a substantial amount of controversy in
the scientific journals about the abnormality rates from these
procedures32. Some authors claim there is an increased rate of
imprinting disorders in pregnancies from assisted reproductive
technologies. This would imply that procedures such as culturing
fertilised eggs outside the body may disrupt the delicately poised
pathways that control reprogramming, especially of imprinted regions.
It’s important to note, however, that there is no consensus yet on
whether this really is a clinically relevant issue.

All the reprogramming of the genome in early development has multiple
effects. It allows two highly differentiated cell types to fuse and form
one pluripotent cell. It balances out the competing demands of the
maternal and paternal genomes, and ensures that this balancing act can
be re-established in every generation. Reprogramming also prevents
inappropriate epigenetic modifications being passed from parent to
offspring. This means that even if cells have accumulated potentially
dangerous epigenetic changes, these will be removed before they are
passed on.

This is why we don’t normally inherit acquired characteristics. But
there are certain regions of the genome, such as IAP retrotransposons,
that are relatively resistant to reprogramming. If we want to work out
how certain acquired characteristics – responses to vinclozolin or
responses to paternal nutrition, for example – get transmitted from
parent to offspring, these IAP retrotransposons might be a good place to
start looking.

  Chapter 9

 

  Generation X

 

  The sound of a kiss is not so loud as that of a cannon, but its echo
  lasts a great deal longer.

  Oliver Wendell Holmes

 

At a purely biological, and especially an anatomical level, men and
women are different. There are ongoing debates about whether or not
certain behaviours, ranging from aggression to spatial processing, have
a biological gender bias. But there are certain physical characteristics
that are linked unequivocally to gender. One of the most fundamental
differences is in the reproductive organs. Women have ovaries, men have
testicles. Women have a vagina and a uterus, men have a penis.

There is a clear biological basis to this, and perhaps unsurprisingly,
it’s all down to genes and chromosomes. Humans have 23 pairs of
chromosomes in their cells, and inherited one of each pair from each
parent. Twenty-two of these pairs (imaginatively named chromosomes 1 to
22) are called autosomes and each member of a specific pair of autosomes
looks very similar. By ‘looks’ we mean exactly that. At a certain stage
in cell division the DNA in chromosomes becomes exceptionally tightly
coiled up. If we use the right techniques we can actually see
chromosomes down a microscope. These chromosomes can be photographed. In
pre-digital days, clinical geneticists literally used to cut out the
pictures of the individual chromosomes with a pair of scissors and
rearrange them in pairs to create a nice orderly picture. These days the
image processing can be carried out by a computer, but in either case
the result is a picture of all the chromosomes in a cell. This picture
is called a karyotype.

Karyotype analysis is how scientists originally discovered that there
were three copies of chromosome 21 in the cells of people with Down’s
syndrome. This is known as trisomy 21.

When we produce a human karyotype from a female, there are 23 pairs of
identical chromosomes. But if we create a human karyotype from a male,
the picture is different, as we can see in Figure 9.1. There are 22
obvious pairs – the autosomes – but there are two chromosomes left over
that don’t look like each other at all. One is very large, one
exceptionally small. These are called the sex chromosomes. The large one
is called X, and the small one is called Y. The notation to describe the
normal chromosome constitution of human males is 46, XY. Females are
described as 46, XX because they don’t have a Y chromosome, and instead
have two X chromosomes.

[9-1a.tif]

 

[9-1b.tif]

Figure 9.1 Karyotype of all the chromosomes in a male (top) and female
(bottom) somatic cell. Note that the female cell contains two X
chromosomes and no Y chromosome; the male cell contains one X chromosome
and one Y chromosome. Note also the substantial difference in size
between the X and Y chromosomes. Photos: Wessex Reg Genetics
Centre/Wellcome Images.

 

The Y chromosome carries very few active genes. There are only between
40 and 50 protein-coding genes on the Y chromosome, of which about half
are completely male-specific. The male-specific genes only occur on the
Y chromosome, so females have no copies of these. Many of these genes
are required for male-specific aspects of reproduction. The most
important one in terms of sex determination is a gene called SRY. SRY
proteins activate a testis-determining pathway in the embryo. This leads
to production of testosterone, the archetypal ‘male’ hormone, which then
masculinises the embryo.

Occasionally, individuals who phenotypically appear to be girls have the
male 46, XY karyotype. In these cases the SRY gene is often inactive or
deleted and consequently the foetus develops down the default female
pathway1. Sometimes, the other scenario arises. Individuals who
phenotypically appear to be boys can have the typically female karyotype
of 46, XX. In these cases a tiny section of the Y chromosome containing
the SRY gene has often transferred onto another chromosome during
formation of sperm in the father. This is enough to drive
masculinisation of the foetus2. The region of the Y chromosome that was
transferred was too small to be detected by the karyotyping process.

The X chromosome is very different. The X chromosome is extremely large
and carries about 1300 genes. A disproportionate number of these genes
are involved in brain function. Many are also required for various
stages in formation of the ovaries or the testes, and for other aspects
of fertility in both males and females3.

Getting the dose right

 

So, about 1300 genes on the X chromosome. That creates an interesting
problem. Females have two X chromosomes but males only have one. That
means that for these 1300 genes on the X, females have two copies of
each gene but males only have one. We might speculate from this that
female cells would produce twice the amounts of proteins from these
genes (referred to as X-linked genes) as males.

But our knowledge of disorders like Down’s syndrome makes this seem
rather unlikely. Having three copies of chromosome 21 (instead of the
normal two) results in Down’s syndrome, which is a major disorder in
those individuals who are born with the condition. Trisomies of most
other chromosomes are so severe that children are never born with these
conditions, because the embryos cannot develop properly. For example, no
child has ever been born who has three copies of chromosome 1 in all
their cells. If the 50 per cent increase in gene expression from an
autosome can cause such problems in trisomic conditions, how do we
explain the X chromosome scenario? How is it possible for females to
survive when they have twice as many X chromosome genes as males? Or, to
put it the other way – why are males viable if they only have half as
many X chromosome genes as females?

The answer is that expression of X-linked genes is actually pretty much
the same in males and females, despite the different number of
chromosomes, a phenomenon called dosage compensation. The XY system of
sex determination doesn’t exist in other animal classes so X chromosome
dosage compensation is limited to placental mammals.

In the early 1960s a British geneticist called Mary Lyon postulated how
dosage compensation would occur at the X chromosome. These were her
predictions:

1.  Cells from the normal female would contain only one active X
    chromosome;
2.  X inactivation would occur early in development;
3.  The inactive X could be either maternally or paternally derived, and
    the inactivation would be random in any one cell;
4.  X inactivation would be irreversible in a somatic cell and all its
    descendants.

These predictions have proven remarkably prescient4,5. So prescient, in
fact, that many textbooks refer to X inactivation as Lyonisation. We’ll
take the predictions one at a time:

1.  Individual cells from a normal female do indeed only express genes
    from one X chromosome copy – the other copy is, effectively, shut
    down;
2.  X inactivation occurs early in development, at the stage when the
    pluripotent cells of the embryonic inner cell mass are beginning to
    differentiate into different lineages (near the top of Waddington’s
    epigenetic landscape);
3.  On average, in 50 per cent of cells in a female the maternally
    derived X chromosome is shut down. In the other 50 per cent of cells
    it’s the chromosome inherited from Dad which gets inactivated;
4.  Once a cell has switched off one of a pair of X chromosomes, that
    particular copy of the X stays switched off in all the daughter
    cells for the rest of that woman’s life, even if she lives to over
    100 years of age.

The X chromosome isn’t inactivated by mutation; it keeps its DNA
sequence entirely intact. X inactivation is the epigenetic phenomenon
par excellence.

X inactivation has proven to be a remarkably fertile research field.
Some of the mechanisms involved have turned out to have parallels in a
number of other epigenetic and cellular processes. The consequences of X
inactivation have important implications for a number of human disorders
and for therapeutic cloning. Yet even now, 50 years on from Mary Lyon’s
ground-breaking work, there remain a number of mysteries about how X
inactivation actually takes place.

The more we ponder X inactivation, the more extraordinary it appears.
For a start, the inactivation is only on the X chromosome, not on any of
the autosomes, so the cell must have a way of distinguishing X
chromosomes and autosomes from one another. Furthermore, the
inactivation in the X doesn’t just affect one or a few genes, such as
occurs in imprinting. No, in X inactivation, over 1,000 genes are turned
off, for decades.

Think of a car manufacturer, with a factory in Japan and another in
Germany. Imprinting is the equivalent of a few changes in specification
for the different markets. The German factory may switch on the machine
that installs the heater on the steering wheel and switch off the robot
that inserts the automatic air freshener, whilst the Japanese factory
does the opposite. X inactivation is the equivalent of shutting down and
mothballing one factory, never to be re-opened unless the company is
bought by a new manufacturer.

Random inactivation

 

The other major difference between X-inactivation and imprinting is that
there is no parent-of-origin effect in X imprinting. In somatic cells,
it doesn’t matter if an X chromosome was inherited from your mother or
your father. Each has a 50 per cent chance of being inactivated. The
reason why this is the case makes complete evolutionary sense.

Imprinting is about balancing out the competing demands of the maternal
and paternal genomes, especially during development. The imprinting
mechanisms that have evolved are specifically targeted at individual
genes, or small clusters of genes, that particularly influence foetal
growth. There are, after all, only 50–100 imprinted genes in the
mammalian genome.

But X inactivation operates on a much greater scale. It’s a mechanism
for switching off over 1,000 genes, en masse and permanently. A thousand
genes is a lot, about 5 per cent of the total number of protein-coding
genes, so there’s always a possibility that any given gene on an X
chromosome may have a mutation. Figure 9.2 compares the outcomes of
imprinted X inactivation on the left, with random X inactivation on the
right. For clarity, the diagram just exemplifies a mutation in a
paternally inherited gene, with imprinted inactivation of the maternally
derived X chromosome.

[Fig-20.eps]

 

Figure 9.2 Each circle represents a female cell, containing two X
chromosomes. The X chromosome inherited from the mother is indicated by
the female symbol. The X chromosome inherited from the father is
indicated by the male symbol, and contains a mutation, denoted by the
white square notch. The left hand side of the diagram demonstrates that
imprinted inactivation of the maternally derived X chromosome would
result in all cells of the body expressing only the X chromosome
carrying the mutation, which was inherited from the father. On the right
hand side, the X chromosomes are randomly inactivated, independent of
their parent-of-origin. As a result, on average, half of the somatic
cells will express the normal version of the X chromosome. This makes
random X inactivation a less risky evolutionary strategy than imprinted
X inactivation.

 

By using random X inactivation, cells are able to minimise the effects
of mutations in X-linked genes.

It’s important to bear in mind that the inactive X really is inactive.
Almost all the genes are permanently shut off and this inactivation
cannot normally be broken. When we refer to the active X chromosome, we
are using slightly ambiguous shorthand. It doesn’t mean that every gene
on that X is active all the time in every cell. Rather, the genes have
the potential to be active. They are subject to all the normal
epigenetic modifications and controls on gene expression, so that
selected genes are switched on or off in a controlled manner, in
response to developmental cues or environmental signals.

Women really are more complicated than men

 

One interesting consequence of X inactivation is that (epigenetically)
females are more complicated than males. Males only have one X
chromosome in their cells, so they don’t carry out X inactivation. But
females randomly inactivate an X chromosome in all their cells.
Consequently, at a very fundamental level, all cells in a female body
can be split into two camps depending on which X chromosome they
inactivated. The expression for this is that females are epigenetic
mosaics.

This sophisticated epigenetic control in females is a complicated and
highly regulated process, and that’s where Mary Lyon’s predictions have
provided such a useful conceptual framework. They can be paraphrased as
the following four steps:

1.  Counting: cells from the normal female would contain only one active
    X chromosome;
2.  Choice: X inactivation would occur early in development;
3.  Initiation: the inactive X could be either maternally or paternally
    derived, and the inactivation would be random in any one cell;
4.  Maintenance: X inactivation would be irreversible in a somatic cell
    and all its descendants.

Unravelling the mechanisms behind these four processes has kept
researchers busy for nearly 50 years, and this effort is continuing
today. The processes are incredibly complicated and sometimes involve
mechanisms that had barely been imagined by any scientists. That’s not
really surprising, because Lyonisation is quite extraordinary – X
inactivation is a procedure where a cell treats two identical
chromosomes in diametrically opposite and mutually exclusive ways.

Experimentally, X inactivation is challenging to investigate. It is a
finely balanced system in cells, and slight variations in technique may
have a major impact on the outcome of experiments. There’s also
considerable debate about the most appropriate species to study. Mouse
cells have traditionally been used as the experimental system of choice,
but we are now realising that mouse and human cells aren’t identical
with respect to X inactivation6. However, even allowing for these
ambiguities, a fascinating picture is beginning to emerge.

Counting chromosomes

 

Mammalian cells must have a mechanism to count how many X chromosomes
they contain. This prevents the X chromosome from being switched off in
male cells. The importance of this was shown in the 1980s by Davor
Solter. He created embryos by transferring male pronuclei into
fertilised eggs. Males have an XY karyotype, and when they produce
gametes each individual sperm will contain either an X or a Y. By taking
pronuclei from different sperm and injecting them into ‘empty’ eggs, it
was possible to create XX, XY or YY zygotes. None of these resulted in
live births, because a zygote requires both maternal and paternal
inputs, as we have already seen. But the results still told us something
very interesting, and are summarised in Figure 9.3.

[Fig-21.eps]

 

Figure 9.3 Donor egg reconstitution experiments were performed in which
the donor egg received a male and female pronucleus or two pronuclei
from males. Just as in Figure 7.2, the embryos derived from two male
pronuclei failed to develop to term. When the nuclei each contained a
Y chromosome, and no X chromosome, the embryos failed at a very early
stage. Embryos derived from two male pronuclei where at least one
contained an X chromosome developed further before they also died.

 

The earliest loss of embryos occurred in those that had been
reconstituted from two male pronuclei which each contained a Y
chromosome as the sole sex chromosome7. In these embryos there was no X
chromosome at all, and this was associated with exceptionally early
developmental failure. This shows that the X chromosome is clearly
essential for viability. This is why male (XY) cells need to be able to
count, so that they can recognise that they only contain one X, and thus
avoid inactivating it. Turning off the solitary X would be disastrous
for the cell.

Having counted the number of X chromosomes, there must be a mechanism in
female cells by which one X is randomly selected for inactivation.
Having selected a chromosome, the cell starts the inactivation
procedure.

X inactivation happens early in female embryogenesis, as the cells of
the ICM begin to differentiate into the different cell types of the
body. Experimentally, it is difficult to work on the small number of
cells available from each blastocyst so researchers typically use female
ES cells. Both X chromosomes are active in these cells, just like in the
undifferentiated ICM. It’s easy to roll ES cells down Waddington’s
epigenetic landscape, just by subtly altering the conditions in which
the cells are cultured in the lab. Once we change the conditions to
encourage the female ES cells to differentiate, they begin to inactivate
an X chromosome. Because ES cells can be grown in almost limitless
numbers in labs, this provides a convenient model system for studying X
inactivation.

Painting an X-rated picture

 

Initial insights into X inactivation came from studying mice and cell
lines with structurally rearranged chromosomes. In some of these
studies, various sections of an X chromosome were missing. Depending on
which parts were missing, the X chromosome did or did not inactivate
normally. In other studies, sections had come off the X chromosome and
attached themselves onto an autosome. Depending on which part of the X
chromosome had transferred, this could result in switching off the
structurally abnormal autosome8,9.

These experiments showed that there was a region on the X chromosome
that was vitally important for X inactivation. This region was dubbed
the X Inactivation Centre. In 1991 a group from Hunt Willard’s lab at
Stanford University in California showed that the X Inactivation Centre
contained a gene that they called Xist, after X-inactive (Xi) specific
transcript10. This gene was only expressed from the inactive X
chromosome, not from the active one. Because the gene was only expressed
from one of the two X chromosomes, this made it an attractive candidate
as the controller of X inactivation, where two identical chromosomes
behave non-identically.

Attempts were made to identify the protein encoded by the Xist gene11
but by 1992 it was clear that there was something very strange going on.
The Xist gene was transcribed to form RNA copies. The RNA was processed
just like any other RNA. It was spliced, and various structures were
added to each end of the transcript to improve its stability. So far, so
normal. But before RNA molecules can code for protein, they have to move
out of the nucleus and into the cytoplasm of the cell. This is because
the ribosomes – the intracellular factories that join amino acids into
long protein chains – are only found in the cytoplasm. But the Xist RNA
never moved out of the nucleus, which meant it could never generate a
protein12,13.

This at least cleared up one thing that had puzzled the scientific
community when the Xist gene was first identified. Mature Xist RNA is a
long molecule, of about 17,000 base-pairs (17kb). One amino acid is
coded for by a three base-pair codon, as described in Chapter 3.
Therefore, in theory, the 17,000 base-pairs of Xist should be able to
code for a protein of about 5,700 amino acids. But when researchers
analysed the Xist sequence with protein prediction programs, they simply
couldn’t see how it could encode anything this long. There were stop
codons (which signal the end of a protein) all through the Xist sequence
and the longest predicted run without stop codons was only enough to
code for 298 amino acids (894 base-pairs14). Why would a gene have
evolved which created a 17kb transcript, but only used about 5 per cent
of this to encode protein? That would be a very inefficient use of
energy and resources in a cell.

But since Xist never actually leaves the nucleus, its lack of potential
protein coding is irrelevant. Xist doesn’t act as a messenger RNA (mRNA)
that transmits the code for a protein. It is a class of molecule called
a non-coding RNA (ncRNA). Xist may not code for protein, but this
doesn’t mean it has no activity. Instead, the Xist ncRNA itself acts as
a functional molecule, and it is critical for X inactivation.

Back in 1992 ncRNAs were a real novelty, and only one other was known at
the time. Even now, there is something very unusual about Xist. It’s not
just that it doesn’t leave the nucleus. Xist doesn’t even leave the
chromosome that produces it. When ES cells begin to differentiate, only
one of the chromosomes produces Xist RNA. This is the chromosome that
will be the inactive one. Xist doesn’t move away from the chromosome
that produced it. Instead, it binds to the chromosome and starts to
spread out along it.

Xist is often described as ‘painting’ the inactive X and it’s a very
good description. Let’s revert yet again to our analogy of the DNA code
as a script. This time we’ll imagine that the script is written on a
wall, maybe it’s an inspiring poem or speech in a classroom. At the end
of the summer term the school building closes down and is sold for
conversion to apartments. The decorators arrive and paint over the
script. Now there’s nothing to tell the new residents to ‘play up and
play the game’, or exactly how they should ‘meet with Triumph and
Disaster’. But the instructions are actually still there, they’re just
hidden from view.

When Xist binds over the X chromosome that produced it, it induces a
kind of creeping epigenetic paralysis. It covers more and more genes,
switching them off. It first seems to do this by acting as a barrier
between the genes and the enzymes that normally copy them into mRNA. But
as the X inactivation gets better established, it changes the epigenetic
modifications on the chromosome. The histone modifications that normally
turn genes on are removed. They are replaced by repressive histone
modifications that turn genes off.

Some of the normal histones are removed altogether. Histone H2A is
replaced by a related but subtly different molecule called macroH2A,
strongly associated with gene repression. The promoters of genes undergo
DNA methylation, an even more stringent way of turning the genes off.
All these changes lead to binding of more and more repressor molecules,
coating the DNA on the inactive X and making it less and less accessible
to the enzymes that transcribe genes. Eventually, the DNA on the X
chromosome gets incredibly tightly wound up, like a giant wet towel
being turned at each end, and the whole chromosome moves to the edge of
the nucleus. By this stage most of the X chromosome is completely
inactive, except for the Xist gene, which is a little pool of activity
in the midst of a transcriptional desert15.

Whenever a cell divides, the modifications to the inactive X are copied
over from mother cell to daughter cell, and so the same X remains
inactivated in all subsequent generations of that starter cell.

While the effects of Xist are amazing, the description above still
leaves a lot of questions unanswered. How is Xist expression controlled?
Why does it switch on when ES cells start to differentiate? Is Xist only
functional when it’s in female cells, or could it act in males cells
too?

The power of a kiss

 

The last question was first addressed in the lab of Rudi Jaenisch, whom
we met in the context of iPS cells and Shinya Yamanaka’s work in Chapter
2. In 1996, Professor Jaenisch and his colleagues created mice carrying
a genetically engineered version of the X Inactivation Centre (an X
Inactivation Centre transgene). This was 450kb in size, and included the
Xist gene plus other sequences on either side. They inserted this into
an autosome (non-sex chromosome), created male mice carrying this
transgene, and studied ES cells from these mice. The male mice only
contained one normal X chromosome, because they have the XY karyotype.
However, they had two X Inactivation Centres. One was on the normal X
chromosome, and one was on the transgene on the autosome. When the
researchers differentiated the ES cells from these mice, they found that
Xist could be expressed from either of the X Inactivation Centres. When
Xist was expressed, it inactivated the chromosome from which it was
expressed, even if this was the autosome carrying the transgene16.

These experiments showed that even cells that are normally male (XY) can
count their X chromosomes. Actually, to be more specific, it showed they
could count their X Inactivation Centres. The data also demonstrated
that the critical features for counting, choosing and initiation were
all present in the 450kb of the X Inactivation Centre around the Xist
gene.

We know a bit more now about the mechanism of chromosome counting. Cells
don’t normally count their autosomes. Both copies of chromosome 1, for
example, operate independently. But we know that the two copies of the X
chromosome in a female ES cell somehow communicate with each other. When
X inactivation is getting going, the two X chromosomes in a cell do
something very weird.

They kiss.

That’s a very anthropomorphic way of describing the event, but it’s a
pretty good description. The ‘kiss’ only lasts a couple of hours or so,
and it’s startling to think this sets a pattern that can persist in
cells for the next hundred years, if a woman lives that long. This
chromosomal smooch was first shown in 1996 by Jeannie Lee, who started
out as a post-doctoral researcher in Rudi Jaenisch’s lab, but who is now
a professor in her own right at Harvard Medical School, where she was
one of the youngest professors ever appointed. She showed that
essentially the two copies of the X find each other and make physical
contact. This physical contact is only over a really small fraction of
the whole chromosome, but it’s essential for triggering inactivation17.
If it doesn’t happen, then the X chromosome assumes it is all alone in
the cell, Xist never gets switched on, and there is no X inactivation.
This is a key stage in chromosome counting.

It was Jeannie Lee’s lab that also identified one of the critical genes
that controls Xist expression18. DNA is double-stranded, with the bases
in the middle holding the strands together. Although we often envisage
it as looking like a railway track, it might be better to think of it as
two cable cars, running in opposite directions. If we use this metaphor,
then the X Inactivation Centre looks a bit like Figure 9.4.

[Fig-22.Eps]

 

Figure 9.4 The two strands of DNA at a specific location on the
X chromosome can each be copied to create mRNA molecules. The two
backbones are copied in opposite directions to each other, allowing the
same region of the X chromosome to produce Xist RNA or Tsix RNA.

 

There is another non-coding RNA, about 40kb in length, in the same
stretch of DNA as Xist. It overlaps with Xist but is on the opposite
strand of the DNA molecule. It is transcribed into RNA in the opposite
direction to Xist and is referred to as an antisense transcript. Its
name is Tsix. The eagle-eyed reader will notice that Tsix is Xist
backwards, which has an unexpectedly elegant logic to it.

This overlap in location between Tsix and Xist is really significant in
terms of how they interact, but it makes it exceedingly tricky to
perform conclusive experiments. That’s because it’s very difficult to
mutate one of the genes without mutating its partner on the opposite
strand, a sort of collateral damage. Despite this, considerable strides
have been made in understanding how Tsix influences Xist.

If an X chromosome expresses Tsix, this prevents Xist expression from
the same chromosome. Oddly enough, it may be the simple action of
transcribing Tsix that prevents the Xist expression, rather than the
Tsix ncRNA itself. This is analogous to a mortice lock. If I lock a
mortice from the inside of my house and leave the key in the lock, my
partner can’t unlock the door from the outside of the house. I don’t
need to keep locking the door, just having the key in there is enough to
stop the action of someone on the other side. So, when Tsix is switched
on, Xist is switched off and the X chromosome is active.

This is the situation in ES cells, where both X chromosomes are active.
Once the ES cells begin to differentiate, one of the pair stops
expressing Tsix. This allows expression of Xist from that X chromosome,
which drives X inactivation.

Tsix alone is probably not enough to keep Xist repressed. In ES cells,
the proteins Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog bind to the first intron of Xist and
suppress its expression19. Oct4 and Sox2 were two of the four factors
used by Shinya Yamanaka when he reprogrammed somatic cells to the
pluripotent iPS cell type. Subsequent experiments showed that Nanog
(named after the mythical Celtic land of everlasting youth) can also
work as a reprogramming factor. Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog are highly
expressed in undifferentiated cells like ES cells, but their levels fall
as cells start to differentiate. When this happens in differentiating
female ES cells, Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog stop binding to the Xist intron.
This removes some of the barriers to Xist expression. Conversely, when
female somatic cells are reprogrammed using the Yamanaka approach, the
inactive X chromosome is reactivated20. The only other time the inactive
X is reactivated is during the formation of primordial germ cells in
development, which is why the zygote starts out with two active X
chromosomes.

We are still a bit vague as to why X inactivation is so mutually
exclusive between the pair of chromosomes. One theory is that it’s all
down to what happens when the X chromosomes kiss. This happens at a
developmental point where Tsix levels are starting to fall, and the
levels of the Yamanaka factors are also declining. The theory is that
the pair of chromosomes reaches some sort of compromise. Rather than
each ending up with a sub-optimal amount of non-coding RNAs and other
factors, the binding molecules all get shunted together onto one of the
pair. There’s not a great deal of clarity on how this happens. It could
be that one of the pair of chromosomes just by chance carries slightly
more of a key factor than the other. This makes it slightly more
attractive to certain proteins. Complexes may build up in a
self-sustaining way, so that the more of a complex one chromosome starts
with, the more it can drag off its partner. The rich get richer, the
poor get poorer …

It’s quite remarkable how many gaps remain in our understanding of X
inactivation, 50 years after Mary Lyon’s formative work. We don’t even
really understand how the Xist RNA ends up coating the chromosome from
which it is expressed, or how it recruits all those negative repressive
epigenetic enzymes and modifications. So perhaps it’s timely to move off
the shifting sands and step back onto more solid ground.

Let’s return to this statement from earlier in the chapter: ‘Once a cell
has switched off one of a pair of X chromosomes, that particular copy of
the X stays switched off in all the daughter cells for the rest of that
woman’s life, even if she lives to over a hundred years of age.’ How do
we know that? How can we be so certain that X inactivation is stable in
somatic cells? It is now possible to perform genetic manipulation to
show this in species like mice. But long before that became feasible
scientists were already pretty certain this was the case. For this piece
of information we thank not mice, but cats.

Learning from the epigenetic cat

 

Not just any old cats, but specifically tortoiseshell ones. You probably
know how to recognise a classic tortoiseshell cat. It’s the one that’s a
mixture of black and ginger splodges, sometimes on a white background.
The colour of each hair in a cat’s coat is caused by cells called
melanocytes that produce pigment. Melanocytes are found in the skin, and
develop from special stem cells. When melanocyte stem cells divide, the
daughter cells stay close to each other, forming a little patch of
clonal cells from the same parent stem cell.

Now, here’s an amazing thing: if a cat’s colour is tortoiseshell, it’s a
female.

There is a gene for coat colour that encodes either black pigment or
orange pigment. This gene is carried on the X chromosome. A cat may
receive the black version of the gene on the X chromosome inherited from
her mother and the orange version on the X chromosome inherited from her
father (or vice versa). Figure 9.5 shows what happens next.

[Fig-23.Eps]

 

Figure 9.5 In female tortoiseshell cats, the genes for orange and black
fur are carried on the X chromosome. Depending on the pattern of X
chromosome inactivation in the skin, clonal patches of cells will give
rise to discrete patterns of orange and black fur.

 

So the tortoiseshell cat ends up with patches of orange and patches of
black, depending on the X chromosome that was randomly inactivated in
the melanocyte stem cell. The pattern won’t change as the cat gets
older, it stays the same throughout its life. That tells us that the X
inactivation stays the same in the cells that create this coat pattern.

We know that tortoiseshell cats are always female because the gene for
the coat colour is only on the X chromosome, not the Y. A male cat only
has one X chromosome, so it could have black fur or ginger fur, but
never both.

Something rather similar happens in a rare human disorder called
X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia. This condition is caused by
mutations in a gene called ECTODYSPLASIN-A, carried on the X
chromosome21. A male with a mutation in his sole copy of ECTODYSPLASIN-A
on his single X chromosome has a variety of symptoms, including a total
lack of sweat glands. This might sound socially advantageous, but is
actually incredibly dangerous. Sweating is one of the major routes by
which we lose excess heat, and men with this condition are at serious
risk of tissue damage or even death as a result of heat stroke22.

Females have two copies of the ECTODYSPLASIN-A gene, one on each of
their X chromosomes. In female carriers of X-linked hypohidrotic
ectodermal dysplasia, one X carries a normal copy of the gene, and one a
mutated version. There will be random inactivation of one X chromosome
in different cells. This means some cells will express a normal copy of
ECTODYSPLASIN-A. Other cells will randomly shut down the X carrying the
normal copy of the gene, and won’t be able to express the
ECTODYSPLASIN-A protein. Because of the clonal way in which areas of
skin develop, just like in the tortoiseshell cat, these women have some
patches of skin that express ECTODYSPLASIN-A and some that don’t. Where
there’s no ECTODYSPLASIN-A, the skin can’t form sweat glands. As a
consequence, these women have patches of skin that can sweat and cool
down, and others that can’t.

Random X inactivation can significantly influence how females are
affected by mutations in genes on the X chromosome. This depends not
just on the type of gene that is mutated but also on the tissues that
express and require the protein encoded by that gene. The disease called
mucopolysaccharidosis II (MPSII) is caused by mutations in the LYSOSOMAL
IDURONATE-2-SULFATASE gene, on the X chromosome. Boys with this mutation
on their single X chromosome are unable to break down certain large
molecules and these build up to toxic levels in cells. The main symptoms
include airway infections, short stature and enlargement of the spleen
and liver. Severely affected boys also suffer mental retardation, and
may die in their teenage years.

Females with a mutation in the same gene are usually perfectly healthy.
LYSOSOMAL IDURONATE-2-SULFATASE protein is usually secreted out of the
cell that makes it and taken up by neighbouring cells. In this situation
it doesn’t matter too much which X chromosome has been mutated in a
specific cell. For every cell that has inactivated the X carrying the
normal version of the gene, there is likely to be another cell nearby
which inactivated the other X chromosome and is secreting the protein.
This way, all cells end up with sufficient LYSOSOMAL
IDURONATE-2-SULFATASE protein, whether they produce it themselves or
not23.

Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a severe muscle wasting disease caused by
mutations in the X-linked DYSTROPHIN gene. This is a large gene that
encodes a big protein which acts as an essential shock absorber in
muscle fibres. Boys carrying certain mutations in DYSTROPHIN suffer
major muscle loss that usually results in death in the teenage years.
Females with the same mutation are usually symptom-free. The reason for
this is that muscle has a very unusual structure. It is called a
syncytial tissue, which means that lots of individual cells fuse and
operate almost like one giant cell, but with lots of discrete nuclei.
This is why most females with a DYSTROPHIN mutation are symptom-free.
There is enough normal DYSTROPHIN protein encoded by the nuclei that
switched off the mutated DYSTROPHIN gene to keep this syncytial tissue
functioning healthily24.

There are occasional cases where this system breaks down. There was a
case of female monozygotic twins where one twin was severely affected by
Duchenne muscular dystrophy and the other was healthy25. In the affected
twin, the X inactivation had become skewed. Early in tissue
differentiation the majority of her cells that would give rise to muscle
happened, by ill chance, to switch off the X chromosome carrying the
normal copy of the DYSTROPHIN gene. Thus, most of the muscle tissue in
this woman only expressed the mutated version of DYSTROPHIN, and she
developed severe muscle wasting. This could be considered the ultimate
demonstration of the power of a random epigenetic event. Two identical
individuals, each with two apparently identical X chromosomes, had a
completely discordant phenotype, because of a shift in the epigenetic
balance of power.

Sometimes, however, it is essential that individual cells express the
correct amount of a protein. You may have noticed in Chapter 4 that Rett
syndrome only affected girls. One might hypothesise that boys are
somehow very resistant to the effects of the MeCP2 mutation, but
actually the opposite is true. MeCP2 is carried on the X chromosome so a
male foetus that inherits a Rett syndrome mutation in this gene has no
means of expressing normal MeCP2 protein. A complete lack of normal
MeCP2 expression is generally lethal in early development, and that’s
why very few boys are born with Rett syndrome. Girls have two copies of
the MeCP2 gene, one on each X chromosome. In any given cell, there is a
50 per cent chance that the cell will inactivate the X that carries the
unmutated MeCP2 gene and that the cell will not express normal MeCP2
protein. Although a female foetus can develop, there are ultimately
major effects on normal post-natal brain development and function when a
substantial number of neurons lack MeCP2 protein.

One, two, many

 

There are other issues that can develop around the X chromosome. One of
the questions we need to answer about X inactivation, is how good
mammalian cells are at counting. In 2004 Peter Gordon of Columbia
University in New York reported on his studies on the Piraha tribe in an
isolated region of Brazil. This tribe had numbers for one and two.
Everything beyond two was described by a word roughly equating to
‘many’26. Are our cells the same, or can they count above two? If a
nucleus contains more than two X chromosomes, can the X inactivation
machinery recognise this, and deal with the consequences? Various
studies have shown that it can. Essentially, no matter how many X
chromosomes (or more strictly speaking X Inactivation Centres) are
present in a nucleus, the cell can count them and then inactivate
multiple X chromosomes until there is only one remaining active.

This is the reason why abnormal numbers of X chromosomes are relatively
frequent in humans, in contrast to abnormalities in the number of
autosomes. The commonest examples are shown in Table 9.1.

 

+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+-------------+
| Name of     | Karyotype   | Gender   | Frequency   | Common      |
| syndrome    | i.e. set of |          | of live     | symptoms    |
|             | chromosomes |          | births      |             |
|             |             |          | (known      |             |
|             |             |          | cases,      |             |
|             |             |          | probably    |             |
|             |             |          | under       |             |
|             |             |          | -estimated) |             |
+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+-------------+
|   Turner    |   45,X      |   Female |   1 in      |   Short     |
|             |             |          |   2,500     |   stature   |
|             |             |          |             |             |
|             |             |          |             |             |
|             |             |          |             | Infertility |
|             |             |          |             |             |
|             |             |          |             |   Webbed    |
|             |             |          |             |   neck      |
|             |             |          |             |             |
|             |             |          |             |   Kidney    |
|             |             |          |             |   ab        |
|             |             |          |             | normalities |
+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+-------------+
|   Trisomy X |   47,XXX    |   Female |   1 in      |   Tall      |
|             |             |          |   1,000     |   stature   |
|             |             |          |             |             |
|             |             |          |             |             |
|             |             |          |             | Infertility |
|             |             |          |             |             |
|             |             |          |             |   Unusual   |
|             |             |          |             |   facial    |
|             |             |          |             |   features  |
|             |             |          |             |             |
|             |             |          |             |   Poor      |
|             |             |          |             |   muscle    |
|             |             |          |             |   tone      |
+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+-------------+
|   Kl        |   47,XXY    |   Male   |   1 in      |   Lanky     |
| inefelter’s |             |          |   1,000     |   build or  |
|             |             |          |             |   rounded   |
|             |             |          |             |   body type |
|             |             |          |             |             |
|             |             |          |             |             |
|             |             |          |             | Infertility |
|             |             |          |             |             |
|             |             |          |             |   Language  |
|             |             |          |             |   deficits  |
+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+-------------+

 

Table 9.1 Summary of the major characteristics of the commonest
abnormalities in sex chromosome number in humans.

 

The infertility that is a feature of all these disorders is in part due
to problems when creating eggs or sperm, where it’s important that
chromosomes line up in their pairs. If there is an uneven total number
of sex chromosomes this stage goes wrong and formation of gametes is
severely compromised.

Leaving aside the infertility, there are two obvious conclusions we can
draw from this table. The first is that the phenotypes are all
relatively mild compared with, for example, trisomy of chromosome 21
(Down’s syndrome). This suggests that cells can tolerate having too many
or too few copies of the X chromosome much better than having extra
copies of an autosome. But the other obvious conclusion is that an
abnormal number of X chromosomes does indeed have some effects on
phenotype.

Why should this be? After all, X inactivation ensures that no matter how
many X chromosomes are present, all bar one get inactivated early in
development. But if this was the end of the story there would be no
difference in phenotype between 45, X females compared with 47, XXX
females or with the normal 46, XX female constitution. Similarly, males
with the normal 46, XY karyotype should be phenotypically identical to
males with the 47, XXY karyotype. In all of these cases there should be
only one active X chromosome in the cells.

One thought as to why people with these karyotypes were clinically
different was that maybe X inactivation is a bit inefficient in some
cells, but this doesn’t seem to be the case. X inactivation is
established very early in development and is the most stable of all
epigenetic processes. An alternative explanation was required.

The answer has its origin about 150 million years ago, when the XY
system of sex determination in placental mammals first developed. The X
and Y chromosomes are probably descendants of autosomes. The Y
chromosome has changed dramatically, the X chromosome much less so27.
However, both retain shadows of their autosomal past. There are regions
on both the X and the Y called pseudoautosomal regions. The genes in
these regions are found on both the X and the Y chromosome, just in the
same way as pairs of autosomes have the same genes in the same
positions, one inherited from each parent.

When an X chromosome inactivates, these pseudoautosomal regions are
spared. This means that, unlike most X-linked genes, those in the
pseudoautosomal regions don’t get switched off. Consequently, normal
cells potentially express two copies of these genes in all cells. The
two copies are expressed either from the two X chromosomes in a normal
female or from the X and the Y in a normal male.

But in Turner’s syndrome, the affected female only has one X chromosome,
so she expresses only one copy of the genes in the pseudoautosomal
region, half as much as normal. In Trisomy X, on the other hand, there
are three copies of the genes in the pseudoautosomal regions. As a
result, the cells in an affected region will produce proteins from these
genes at 50 per cent above the normal level.

One of the genes in the X chromosome pseudoautosomal regions is called
SHOX. Patients with mutations in this gene have short stature. It is
likely that this is also why patients with Turner’s syndrome tend to be
short – they don’t produce enough SHOX protein in their cells. By
contrast, patients with Trisomy X are likely to produce 50 per cent more
SHOX protein than normal, which is probably why they tend to be tall28.

It’s not just humans who have trisomies of the sex chromosomes. One day
you may be happily amazing your friends with your confident statement
that their tortoiseshell cat is female when they deflate you by telling
you that their pet has been sexed by the vet and is actually a Tom. At
this point, smile smugly and then say ‘Oh, in that case he’s
karyotypically abnormal. He has an XXY karyotype, rather than XY’. And
if you’re feeling particularly mean, you can tell them that Tom is
infertile. That should shut them up.

  Chapter 10

 

  The Message is Not the Medium

 

  Science commits suicide when it adopts a creed.

  Thomas Henry Huxley

 

One of the most influential books on the philosophy of science is Thomas
Kuhn’s The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, published in 1962. One
of the claims in Kuhn’s book is that science does not proceed in an
orderly, linear and polite fashion, with all new findings viewed in a
completely unbiased way. Instead, there is a prevailing theory which
dominates a field. When new conflicting data are generated, the theory
doesn’t immediately topple. It may get tweaked slightly, but scientists
can and often do continue to believe in a theory long after there is
sufficient evidence to discount it.

We can visualise the theory as a shed, and the new conflicting piece of
data as an oddly shaped bit of builder’s rubble that has been cemented
onto the roof. Now, we can probably continue cementing bits of rubble
onto the roof for quite some time, but eventually there will come a
point when the shed collapses under the sheer weight of odd bits of
masonry. In science, this is when a new theory develops, and all those
bits of masonry are used to build the foundations of a new shed.

Kuhn described this collapse-and-rebuild as the paradigm shift,
introducing the phrase that has now become such a cliché in the high-end
media world. The paradigm shift isn’t just based on pure rationality. It
involves emotional and sociological changes in the psyches of the
upholders of the prevailing theory. Many years before Thomas Kuhn’s
book, the great German scientist Max Planck, winner of the 1918 Nobel
Prize for Physics, put this rather more succinctly when he wrote that,
‘Scientific theories don’t change because old scientists change their
minds; they change because old scientists die1.’

We are in the middle of just such a paradigm shift in biology.

In 1965, the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded to
François Jacob, André Lwoff and Jacques Monod ‘for their discoveries
concerning genetic control of enzyme and virus synthesis’. Included in
this work was the discovery of messenger RNA (mRNA), which we first met
in Chapter 3. mRNA is the relatively short-lived molecule that transfers
the information from our chromosomal DNA and acts as the intermediate
template for the production of proteins.

We’ve known for many years that there are some other classes of RNA in
our cells, specifically molecules called transfer RNA (tRNA) and
ribosomal RNA (rRNA). tRNAs are small RNA molecules that can hold a
specific amino acid at one end. When an mRNA molecule is read to form a
protein, a tRNA carries its amino acid to the correct place on the
growing protein chain. This takes place at large structures in the
cytoplasm of a cell called ribosomes. The ribosomal RNA is a major
component of ribosomes, where it acts like a giant scaffold to hold
various other RNA and protein molecules in position. The world of RNA
therefore seemed quite straightforward. There were structural RNAs (the
tRNA and rRNA) and there was messenger RNA.

For decades, the stars of the molecular biology catwalk were DNA (the
underlying code) and proteins (the functional, can-do molecules of the
cell). RNA was relegated to being a relatively uninteresting
intermediate molecule, carrying information from a blueprint to the
workers on the factory floor.

Everyone working in molecular biology accepts that proteins are
immensely important. They carry out a huge range of functions that
enable life to happen. Therefore, the genes that encode proteins are
also incredibly important. Even small changes to these protein-coding
genes can result in devastating effects, such as the mutations that
cause haemophilia or cystic fibrosis.

But this world view has potentially left the scientific community a bit
blinkered. The fact that proteins, and therefore by extension
protein-coding genes, are vitally important should not imply that
everything else in the genome is unimportant. Yet this is the
theoretical construct that has applied for decades now. That’s actually
quite odd, because we’ve had access for many years to data that show
that proteins can’t be the whole story.

Why we don’t throw away our junk

 

Scientists have recognised for some time that the blueprint is edited by
cells before it is delivered to the workers. This is because of introns,
which we met in Chapter 3. They are the sequences that are copied from
DNA into mRNA, but then spliced out before the message is translated
into a protein sequence by the ribosomes. Introns were first identified
in 19752 and the Nobel Prize for their discovery was awarded to Richard
Roberts and Phillip Sharp in 1993.

Back in the 1970s scientists compared simple one-celled organisms and
complex creatures like humans. The amount of DNA in their cells seemed
surprisingly similar, considering how dissimilar the organisms were.
This suggested that some genomes must contain a lot of DNA that isn’t
really used for anything, and led to the concept of ‘junk DNA’3 –
chromosome sequences that don’t do anything useful, because they don’t
code for proteins. At around the same time a number of labs showed that
large amounts of the mammalian genome contain DNA sequences that seem to
be repeated over and over again, and don’t code for proteins (repetitive
DNA). Because they don’t code for protein, it was assumed they weren’t
contributing anything to the cell’s functions. They just appeared to be
along for the ride4,5. Francis Crick and others coined the phrase
‘selfish DNA’ to describe these regions. These two models, of junk DNA
and selfish DNA, have been delightfully described recently as ‘the
emerging view of the genome as being largely populated by genetic hobos
and evolutionary debris6’.

We humans are remarkable, with our trillions of cells, our hundreds of
cell types, our multitudes of tissues and organs. Let’s compare
ourselves (a little smugly, perhaps) with a distant relative, a
microscopic worm, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. C. elegans, as we
usually call it, is only about one millimetre long and lives in soil. It
has many of the same organs as higher animals, such as a gut, mouth and
gonads. However, it only consists of around 1,000 cells. Remarkably, as
C. elegans develops, scientists have been able to identify exactly how
each of these cells arises.

This tiny worm is a powerful experimental tool, because it provides a
roadmap for cell and tissue development. Scientists are able to alter
expression of a gene and then plot out with great precision the effects
of that mutated gene on normal development. In fact, C. elegans has laid
the foundation for so many breakthroughs in developmental biology that
in 2002 the Nobel Committee awarded the Prize in Physiology or Medicine
to Sydney Brenner, Robert Horvitz and John Sulston for their work on
this organism.

We can’t fault C. elegans on grounds of utility, but it is clearly a
much less complex organism than our good selves. Why are we so much more
sophisticated? Given the importance of proteins in cellular function,
the original assumption was that complex organisms like mammals have
more protein-coding genes than simple creatures like C. elegans. This
was a perfectly reasonable hypothesis but it has fallen foul of a
phenomenon described by Thomas Henry Huxley. He was Darwin’s great
champion in the 19th century and it was Huxley who first described ‘the
slaying of a beautiful hypothesis by an ugly fact’.

As DNA sequencing technologies improved in cost and efficiency, numerous
labs throughout the world sequenced the genomes of a number of different
organisms. They were able to use various software tools to identify the
likely protein-coding genes in these different genomes. What they found
was really surprising. There were far fewer protein-coding genes than
expected. Before the human genome was decoded, scientists had predicted
there would be over 100,000 such genes. We now know the real number is
between 20,000 and 25,000 genes7. Even more oddly, C. elegans contains
about 20,200 genes8, not so very different a number from us.

Not only do we and C. elegans have about the same number of genes, these
genes tend to code for pretty much the same proteins. By this we mean
that if we analyse the sequence of a gene in human cells, we can find a
gene of broadly similar sequence in the nematode worm. So the phenotypic
differences between worms and humans aren’t caused by Homo sapiens
having more, different or ‘better’ genes.

Admittedly, more complicated organisms tend to splice their genes in
more ways than simpler creatures. Using our CARDIGAN example from
Chapter 3 as an analogy once again, C. elegans might only be able to
make the proteins DIG and DAN whereas mammals would be able to make
those two proteins and also CARD, RIGA, CAIN and CARDIGAN.

This certainly would allow humans to generate a much greater repertoire
of proteins than the 1mm worm, but it introduces a new problem. How do
more complicated organisms regulate their more complicated splicing
patterns? This regulation could in theory be controlled solely by
proteins, but this in turn has difficulties. The more proteins a cell
needs to regulate in a complicated network, the more proteins it needs
to do the regulation. Mathematical models have shown that this rapidly
leads to a situation where the number of proteins that we need begins to
out-strip the number of proteins that we actually possess – clearly a
non-starter.

Do we have an alternative? We do, and it’s indicated in Figure 10.1.

[Fig-24.eps]

 

Figure 10.1 This graph demonstrates that the complexity of living
organisms scales much better with the percentage of the genome that
doesn’t code for protein (black columns) than it does with the number of
basepairs coding for protein in a genome (white columns). The data are
adapted from Mattick, J. (2007), Exp Biol. 210: 1526–1547.

 

At one extreme we have the bacteria. Bacteria have very small, highly
compacted genomes. Their protein-coding genes cover about 4,000,000
base-pairs, which is about 90 per cent of their genome. Bacteria are
very simple organisms and fairly rigid in the way they control their
gene expression. But things change as we move further up the
evolutionary tree.

The protein-coding genes of C. elegans cover about 24,000,000
base-pairs, but that only accounts for about 25 per cent of their
genome. The remaining 75 per cent doesn’t code for protein. By the time
we reach humans, the protein-coding regions cover about 32,000,000
base-pairs, but this only represents about 2 per cent of the total
genome. There are various ways that we can calculate the protein-coding
regions, but they make relatively little difference to the astonishing
bottom line. Over 98 per cent of the human genome doesn’t code for
protein. All but 2 per cent of our genome is ‘junk’.

In other words, the numbers of genes, or the sizes of these genes, don’t
scale with complexity. The only feature of a genome that really seems to
get bigger as organisms get more complicated is the section that doesn’t
code for protein.

The tyranny of language

 

So what are these non-coding regions of the genome doing, and why are
they so important? It’s when we start to consider this that we begin to
notice what a strong effect language and terminology have on human
thought processes. These regions are called non-coding, but what we mean
is that they don’t code for protein. This isn’t the same as not coding
at all.

There is a well-known scientific proverb: absence of evidence is not the
same as evidence of absence. For example, in astronomy, once scientists
had developed telescopes that could detect infrared radiation, they were
able to detect thousands of stars that had never been ‘seen’ before. The
stars had always been there, but we couldn’t detect them conclusively
until we had an instrument for doing so. A more everyday example might
be a mobile phone signal. Such signals are all around us, but we cannot
detect them unless we have a mobile phone. In other words, what we find
depends very much on how we are looking.

Scientists identify the genes which are expressed in a specific cell
type by analysing the RNA molecules. This is done by extracting all the
RNA from cells and then analysing it using various different techniques,
so that you build a database of all the RNA molecules that are present.
When researchers in the 1980s first began investigating which genes were
expressed in a given cell type, the techniques available were relatively
insensitive. They were also designed to detect only mRNA molecules, as
these were the ones that were assumed to be important. These methods
tended to be good at detecting highly expressed mRNAs and quite poor at
detecting the less well-expressed sequences. Another confounding factor
was that the software used to analyse mRNA was set so that it would
ignore signals originally generated from repetitive, i.e. ‘junk’, DNA.

These techniques served us very well for profiling the mRNA that we were
already interested in – the mRNA molecules that coded for proteins. But
as we have seen, this only represents about 2 per cent of the genome. It
wasn’t until new detection technologies were coupled with hugely
increased computing power that we began to realise that something very
interesting was happening in the remaining 98 per cent – the non-coding
part of our genome.

With these improved methodologies, the scientific world began to
appreciate that there was actually a huge amount of transcription going
on in the parts of the genome that didn’t code for proteins. Initially
this was dismissed as ‘transcriptional noise’. It was suggested that
there was a baseline murmur of expression from all over the genome, as
if these regions of DNA occasionally produced an RNA molecule that got
above a detection threshold. The concept was that although we could
detect these molecules with our new, more sensitive equipment, they
weren’t really biologically meaningful.

The phrase ‘transcriptional noise’ implies a basically random event.
However, the patterns of expression of these non-protein-coding RNAs
were different for different cell types, which suggested that their
transcription was far from random9. For example, there was a lot of this
expression in the brain. It’s now become clear that the patterns of
expression are different in different brain regions10. This effect is
reproducible when the various brain regions are compared from different
individuals. This isn’t what we would expect if this low-level
transcription of RNA was a purely random process.

It is becoming clearer that this transcription from genes that don’t
code for protein is actually critically important for cellular function.
Oddly, however, we remain caught in a linguistic trap of our own making.
The RNA that is produced from these regions, the RNA that was previously
under our radar, is still called non-coding RNA (ncRNA). It’s a sloppy
shorthand, because what we really mean is non-protein-coding RNA. The
ncRNA does, in fact, code for something – it codes for itself, a
functional RNA molecule. Unlike mature mRNA, which is an RNA means to a
protein end, ncRNAs are themselves the end-points.

Re-defining rubbish

 

This is the paradigm shift. For at least 40 years molecular biologists
and geneticists have focused almost exclusively on the genes that code
for proteins, and the proteins themselves. There have been exceptions,
but we’ve just treated these as the odd bits of rubble on the top of the
shed. But non-coding RNAs are finally starting to stand firmly alongside
proteins as fully functional molecules. Different but equal.

These ncRNAs are found all over the genome. Some come from introns.
Originally it was assumed that the spliced-out bits of mRNA from the
introns get degraded by cells. It now seems much more likely that at
least some (if not all or most) are actually processed to act as
functional ncRNAs in their own right. Others overlap genes, frequently
transcribed from the opposite strand to the protein-coding mRNA. Yet
others are found in regions where there are no protein-coding genes at
all.

We met two ncRNAs in the last chapter. These were Xist and Tsix, the
ncRNAs that are required for X inactivation. These are both very long
ncRNAs, of several thousand kilobases in length. When Xist was first
identified, it was only the second known ncRNA. Current estimates
suggest there are thousands of such molecules in the cells of higher
mammals, with over 30,000 ‘long’ ncRNAs (defined as having a length
greater than 200 bases) reported in mice11. Long ncRNAs may actually
out-number protein-coding mRNAs.

In addition to X inactivation, long ncRNAs also appear to play a
critical role in imprinting. Many imprinted regions contain a section
that encodes a long ncRNA, which silences the expression of surrounding
genes. This is similar to the effect of Xist. The protein-coding mRNAs
are silenced on the copy of the chromosome which expresses the long
ncRNA. For example, there is an ncRNA called Air, expressed in the
placenta, exclusively from the paternally inherited mouse chromosome 11.
Expression of Air ncRNA represses the nearby Igf2r gene, but only on the
same chromosome12. This mechanism ensures that Igf2r is only expressed
from the maternally inherited chromosome.

The Air ncRNA gave scientists important insights into how these long
ncRNAs repress gene expression. The ncRNA remained localised to a
specific region in the cluster of imprinted genes, and acted as a magnet
for an epigenetic enzyme called G9a. G9a puts a repressive mark on the
histone H3 proteins in the nucleosomes deposited on this region of DNA.
This histone modification creates a repressive chromatin environment,
which switches off the genes.

This finding was particularly important as it provided some of the first
insights into a question that had been puzzling epigeneticists. How do
histone modifying enzymes, which put on or remove epigenetic marks, get
localised to specific regions of the genome? Histone modifying enzymes
can’t recognise specific DNA sequences directly, so how do they end up
in the right part of the genome?

The patterns of histone modifications are localised to different genes
in different cell types, leading to exquisitely well-regulated gene
expression. For example, the enzyme known as EZH2 methylates the amino
acid called lysine at position 27 on histone H3, but it targets
different histone H3 molecules in different cell types. To put it
simply, it may methylate histone H3 proteins positioned on gene A in
white blood cells but not in neurons. Alternatively, it may methylate
histone H3 proteins positioned on gene B in neurons, but not in white
blood cells. It’s the same enzyme in both cells, but it’s being targeted
differently.

There is increasing evidence that at least some of the targeting of
epigenetic modifications can be explained by interactions with long
ncRNAs. Jeannie Lee and her colleagues have recently investigated long
ncRNAs that bind to a complex of proteins. The complex is called PRC2
and it generates repressive modifications on histones. PRC2 contains a
number of proteins, and the one that interacts with the long ncRNAs is
probably EZH2. The researchers found that the PRC2 complex bound to
literally thousands of different long ncRNA molecules in embryonic stem
cells from mice13. These long ncRNAs may act as bait. They can stay
tethered to the specific region of the genome where they are produced,
and then attract repressive enzymes to shut off gene expression. This
happens because the repressive enzyme complexes contain proteins like
EZH2 that are capable of binding to RNA.

Scientists love to build theories, and in some ways a nice one was
shaping up around long ncRNAs. It seemed that they bind to the region
from which they are transcribed, and repress gene expression on that
same chromosome. But if we go back to our analogy from the start of this
chapter, we’d have to say that it’s now becoming clear we have built a
pretty small shed and already cemented quite a bit of rubble to the
roof.

There’s an amazing family of genes, called HOX genes. When they’re
mutated in fruit flies (Drosophila melanogaster) the results are
incredible phenotypes, such as legs growing out of the head14. There’s a
long ncRNA known as HOTAIR, which regulates a region of genes called the
HOX-D cluster. Just like the long ncRNAs investigated by Jeannie Lee,
HOTAIR binds the PRC2 complex and creates a chromatin region which is
marked with repressive histone modifications. But HOTAIR is not
transcribed from the HOX-D position on chromosome 12. Instead it is
encoded at a different cluster of genes called HOX-C on chromosome 215.
No-one knows how or why HOTAIR binds at the HOX-D position.

There’s a related mystery around the best studied of all long ncRNAs,
Xist. Xist ncRNA spreads out along almost the entire inactive X
chromosome but we really don’t know how. Chromosomes don’t normally
become smothered with RNA molecules. There’s no obvious reason why Xist
RNA should be able to bind like this, but we know it’s nothing to do
with the sequence of the chromosome. The experiments described in the
last chapter, where Xist could inactivate an entire autosome as long as
it contained an X inactivation centre, showed that Xist just keeps on
travelling once it’s on a chromosome. Scientists are basically still
completely baffled about these fundamental characteristics of this
best-studied of all ncRNAs.

Here’s another surprising thing. Until very recently, all long ncRNAs
were thought to repress gene expression. In 2010, Professor Ramin
Shiekhattar at the Wistar Institute in Philadelphia identified over
3,000 long ncRNAs in a number of human cell types. These long ncRNAs
showed different expression patterns in different human cell types,
suggesting they had specific roles. Professor Shiekhattar and his
colleagues tested a small number of the long ncRNAs to try to determine
their functions. They used well-established experimental methods to
knock down expression of their test ncRNAs and then analysed expression
of their neighbouring genes. The predicted outcome, and the actual
results, are shown in Figure 10.2.

[Fig-25.eps]

 

Figure 10.2 ncRNAs were thought to repress expression of target genes.
If this hypothesis were correct, then decreasing the expression of a
specific ncRNA should result in more expression of the target gene, as
the repression diminishes. This is shown in the middle panel. However,
it is now becoming clear that a large number of ncRNAs actually drive up
expression of their target genes. This has been shown by cases in which
experimentally decreasing the expression of an ncRNA has the effect
shown in the right hand side of this figure.

 

Twelve ncRNAs were tested, and in seven cases the scientists found the
result shown in the right-hand panel of Figure 10.2. This was contrary
to expectations, because it suggests that about 50 per cent of long
ncRNAs may actually increase expression of neighbouring genes, not
decrease it16.

Rather pithily, the authors of the paper stated, ‘The precise mechanism
by which our ncRNAs function to enhance gene expression is not known.’
It’s a statement that is very hard to argue with. It has considerable
merit as it makes clear that we currently have no idea how this is
happening. Ramin Shiekhattar’s work does demonstrate rather convincingly
that there is a lot we don’t understand about long ncRNAs, and that we
should be wary of creating new dogma too quickly.

Small is beautiful

 

We should also be wary of assuming that size is everything and that big
is best. The long ncRNAs clearly have major importance in cell function,
but there is another equally importance class of ncRNAs that also has a
significant impact in the cell. The ncRNAs in this class are short
(usually 20–24 bases in length), and they target mRNA molecules, not
DNA. This was first shown in our favourite worm, C. elegans.

As we have already discussed, C. elegans is a very useful model system
because we know exactly how every cell should normally develop. The
timing and sequence of the different stages is very tightly regulated.
One of the key regulators is a protein called LIN-14. The LIN-14 gene is
highly expressed (a lot of LIN-14 protein is produced) during the very
early embryo stages, but is down-regulated as the worms move from larval
stage 1 to larval stage 2. If the LIN-14 gene is mutated the worm gets
the timing of the different stages wrong. If LIN-14 protein stays on for
too long the worm starts to repeat early developmental stages. If LIN-14
protein is lost too early the worm moves into later larval stages
prematurely. Either way, the worm gets very messed up, and normal adult
structures don’t develop.

In 1993 two labs working independently showed how LIN-14 expression was
controlled17,18. Unexpectedly, the key event was binding of a small
ncRNA to the LIN-14 mRNA molecule. This is shown in Figure 10.3. It is
an example of post-transcriptional gene silencing, where an mRNA is
produced but is prevented from generating a protein. This is a very
different way of controlling gene expression from that used by the long
ncRNAs.

[Fig-26.eps]

 

Figure 10.3 Schematic to demonstrate how expression of microRNAs at
specific developmental stages can radically alter expression of a target
gene.

 

The importance of this work is that it laid the foundation for a whole
new model for the regulation of gene expression. Small ncRNAs are now
known to be a mechanism used by organisms throughout the plant and
animal kingdoms to control gene expression. There are various different
types of small ncRNAs, but we’ll concentrate mainly on the microRNAs
(miRNAs).

At least 1,000 different miRNAs have been identified in mammalian cells.
miRNAs are about 21 nucleotides (bases) in length (sometimes slightly
smaller or longer) and most of them seem to act as post-transcriptional
regulators of gene expression. They don’t stop production of an mRNA,
instead they regulate how that mRNA behaves. Typically, they do this by
binding to the 3′ untranslated region (3′ UTR) of an mRNA molecule. This
region is shown in Figure 10.3. It’s present in the mature mRNA, but it
doesn’t code for any amino acids.

When genomic DNA is copied to make mRNA, the original transcript tends
to be very long because it contains both exons (which code for amino
acids) and introns (which do not). As we saw in Chapter 3, introns are
removed during splicing to create an mRNA which codes for protein. But
the Chapter 3 description passed over something. There are stretches of
RNA at the beginning (known as 5′ UTR) and the end (3′ UTR) which don’t
code for amino acids, but don’t get spliced out like introns either.
Instead, these non-coding regions are retained on the mature mRNA and
act as regulatory sequences. One of the functions of the 3′ UTR in
particular is to bind regulatory molecules, including miRNAs.

How does a miRNA bind to an mRNA and what happens when it does? The
miRNA and the 3′ UTR of the mRNA only interact if they recognise each
other. This uses base-pairing, quite similar to that in double stranded
DNA. G can bind C, A can bind U (in RNA, T is replaced by U). Although
miRNAs are usually 21 bases in length, they don’t have to match the mRNA
over the entire 21 nucleotides. The key region is positions 2 to 8 on
the miRNA.

Sometimes the match from 2 to 8 is not perfect, but it’s still close
enough for the two molecules to pair up. In these cases, binding of the
miRNA prevents translation of the mRNA into protein (this is what
happened in the case shown in Figure 10.3). If, however, the match is
perfect, the binding of miRNA to mRNA triggers destruction of the mRNA,
by enzymes that attach to the miRNA19. It’s not yet clear if positions 9
to 21 on the miRNAs also influence in a less direct way how these small
molecules are targeted, or what the consequences of their targeting are.
One thing we do know, however, is that a single miRNA can regulate more
than one mRNA molecule. We saw in Chapter 3 how one gene could encode
lots of different protein molecules, by altering the way in which
messenger RNA is spliced. A single miRNA can influence many of these
differently spliced versions simultaneously. Alternatively, a single
miRNA can also influence quite unrelated proteins that are encoded by
different genes but have similar 3′ UTR sequences.

This can make it very difficult to unravel exactly what a miRNA is doing
in a cell, as the effects will vary depending on the cell type and the
other genes (protein-coding and non-protein-coding) that the cell is
expressing at any one time. That can be important experimentally, but
also has significant consequences for normal health and disease. In
conditions where there are an abnormal number of chromosomes, for
example, it won’t just be protein-coding genes that change in number.
There will also be abnormal production of ncRNAs (large and small).
Because miRNAs in particular can regulate lots of other genes, the
effects of disrupting miRNA copy numbers may be very extensive.

Room for manoeuvre

 

The fact that 98 per cent of the human genome does not code for protein
suggests that there has been a huge evolutionary investment in the
development of complicated ncRNA-mediated regulatory processes. Some
authors have even gone so far as to speculate that ncRNAs are the
genetic features that have underpinned the development of Homo sapiens’
greatest distinguishing feature – our higher thought processes20.

The chimpanzee is our closest relative and its genome was published in
200521. There isn’t one simple, meaningful average figure that we can
give to express how similar the human and chimp genomes are. The
statistics are actually very complicated, because you have to take into
account that different genomic regions (for example repetitive sections
versus single copy protein-coding gene regions) affect the statistics
differently. However, there are two things we can say quite firmly. One
is that human and chimp proteins are incredibly similar. About a third
of all proteins are exactly the same between us and our knuckle-dragging
cousins, and the rest differ only by one or two amino acids. Another
thing we have in common is that over 98 per cent of our genomes don’t
code for protein. This suggests that both species use ncRNAs to create
complex regulatory networks which govern gene and protein expression.
But there is a particular difference which may be very important between
chimps and humans. This lies in how ncRNA is treated in the cells of the
two species.

It’s all to do with a process called editing. It seems that human cells
just can’t leave well-enough alone, particularly when it comes to
ncRNA22. Once an ncRNA has been produced, human cells use various
mechanisms to modify it yet further. In particular, they will often
change the base A to one called I (inosine). Base A can bind to T in
DNA, or U in RNA. But base I can pair with A, C or G. This alters the
sequences to which an ncRNA can bind and hence regulate.

We humans, more than any other species, edit our ncRNA molecules to a
remarkable degree. Not even other primates carry out this reaction as
well as we do23. We also edit particularly extensively in the brain.
This makes editing of ncRNA an attractive candidate process to explain
why we are mentally so much more sophisticated than our primate
relatives, even though we share so much of our DNA template in common.

In some ways, this is the beauty of ncRNAs. They create a relatively
safe method for organisms to use to alter various aspects of cellular
regulation. Evolution has probably favoured this mechanism because it is
simply too risky to try to improve function by changing proteins.
Proteins, you see, are the Mary Poppins of the cell. They are
‘practically perfect in every way’.

Hammers always look pretty similar. Some may be big, some may be small,
but in terms of basic design, there’s not much you can change that would
make a hammer much better. It’s the same with proteins. The proteins in
our bodies have evolved over billions of years. Let’s take just one
example. Haemoglobin is the pigment that transports oxygen around our
bodies, in the red blood cells. It’s beautifully adept at picking up
oxygen in the lungs and releasing it where it’s needed in the tissues.
Nobody working in a lab has been able to create an altered version of
haemoglobin that does a better job than the natural protein.

Creating a haemoglobin molecule that’s worse than normal is surprisingly
easy to do, unfortunately. In fact, that’s what happens in disorders
like sickle cell disease, where mutations create poor haemoglobin
proteins. A similar situation is true for most proteins. So, unless
environmental conditions change dramatically, most alterations to a
protein turn out to be a bad thing. Most proteins are as good as they’re
going to get.

So how has evolution solved the problem of creating ever more complex
and sophisticated organisms? Basically, by altering the regulation of
proteins, rather than altering the proteins themselves. This is what can
be achieved using complicated networks of ncRNA molecules to influence
how, when and to what degree specific proteins are expressed – and there
is evidence to show this actually happens.

miRNAs play major roles in control of pluripotency and control of
cellular differentiation. ES cells can be encouraged to differentiate
into other cell types by changing the culture conditions in which
they’re grown. When they begin to differentiate, it’s essential that ES
cells switch off the gene expression pathways that normally allow them
to keep producing additional ES cells (self-renewal). There is a miRNA
family called let-7 which is essential for this switch-off process24.

One of the mechanisms the let-7 family uses is the down-regulation of a
protein called Lin28. This implies that Lin28 is a pro-pluripotency
protein. It’s therefore not that surprising to discover that Lin28 can
act as a Yamanaka factor. Over-expression of Lin28 protein in somatic
cells increases the chances of reprogramming them to iPS cells25.

Conversely, there are other miRNA families that help ES cells to stay
pluripotent and self-renewing. Unlike let-7, these miRNAs promote the
pluripotent state. In ES cells, the key pluripotency factors such as
Oct4 and Sox2 are bound to the promoters of these miRNAs, activating
their expression. As the ES cells start to differentiate, these factors
fall off the miRNA promoters, and stop driving their expression26. Just
like the Lin28 protein, these miRNAs also improve reprogramming of
somatic cells into iPS cells27.

When we compare stem cells with their differentiated descendants, we
find that they express very different populations of mRNA molecules.
This seems reasonable, as the stem and differentiated cells express
different proteins. But some mRNAs can take a long time to break down in
a cell. This means that when a stem cell starts to differentiate, there
will be a period when it still contains many of the stem cell mRNAs.
Happily, when the stem cell starts differentiating, it switches on a new
set of miRNAs. These target the residual stem cell mRNAs and accelerate
their destruction. This rapid degradation of the pre-existing mRNAs
ensures that the cell moves into a differentiated state as quickly and
irreversibly as possible28.

This is an important safety feature. It’s not good for cells to retain
inappropriate stem cell characteristics – it increases the chance they
will move down a cancer cell pathway. This mechanism is used even more
dramatically in species where embryonic development is very rapid, such
as fruit flies or zebrafish. In these species this process ensures that
maternally-inherited mRNA transcripts supplied by the egg are rapidly
degraded as the fertilised egg turns into a pluripotent zygote29.

miRNAs are also vital for that all-important phase in imprinting
control, the formation of primordial germ cells. A key stage in creation
of primordial germ cells is the activation of the Blimp1 protein that we
met in Chapter 8. Blimp1 expression is controlled by a complex interplay
between Lin28 and let-7 activity30. Blimp1 also regulates an enzyme that
methylates histones, and a class of proteins known as PIWI proteins.
PIWI proteins in turn bind to another type of small ncRNAs known as PIWI
RNAs31. PIWI ncRNAs and proteins don’t seem to play much of a role in
the somatic cells but are required for generation of the male
germline32. PIWI actually stands for P element-induced wimpy testis. If
the PIWI ncRNAs and PIWI proteins don’t interact properly, the testes in
a male foetus don’t form normally.

We are finding more and more instances of cross-talk and interactions
between ncRNAs and epigenetic events. Remember that the genetic
interlopers, the retrotransposons, are normally methylated in the
germline, to prevent their activation. The PIWI pathway is involved in
targeting this DNA methylation33,34. A substantial number of epigenetic
proteins are able to interact with RNA. Binding of non-coding RNAs to
the genome may act as the general mechanism by which epigenetic
modifications are targeted to the correct chromatin region in a specific
cell type35.

ncRNAs have recently been implicated in Lamarckian transmission of
inherited characteristics. In one example, fertilised mouse eggs were
injected with a miRNA which targeted a key gene involved in growth of
heart tissue. The mice which developed from these eggs had enlarged
hearts (cardiac hypertrophy) suggesting that the early injection of the
miRNA disturbed the normal developmental processes. Remarkably, the
offspring of these mice also had a high frequency of cardiac
hypertrophy. This was apparently because the abnormal expression of the
miRNA was recreated during generation of sperm in these mice. There was
no change in the DNA code of the mice, so this was a clear case of a
miRNA driving epigenetic inheritance36.

Murphy’s Law (if something can go wrong, it usually will)

 

But if ncRNAs are so important for cellular function, surely we would
expect to find that sometimes diseases are caused by problems with them.
Shouldn’t there be lots of examples where defects in production or
expression of ncRNAs lead to clinical disorders, aside from the
imprinting or X inactivation conditions? Well, yes and no. Because these
ncRNAs are predominantly regulatory molecules, acting in networks that
are rich in compensatory mechanisms, defects may only have relatively
subtle impacts. The problem this creates experimentally is that most
genetic screens are good at detecting the major phenotypes caused by
mutations in proteins, but may not be so useful for more subtle effects.

There is a small ncRNA called BC1 which is expressed in specific neurons
in mice. When researchers at the University of Munster in Germany
deleted this ncRNA, the mice seemed fine. But then the scientists moved
the mutant animals from the very controlled laboratory setting into a
more natural environment. Under these conditions, it became clear that
the mutants were not the same as normal mice. They were reluctant to
explore their surroundings and were anxious37. If they had simply been
left in their cages, we would never have appreciated that loss of the
BC1 ncRNA actually had a quite pronounced effect on behaviour. A clear
case of what we see being dependent on how we look.

The impact of ncRNAs in clinical conditions is starting to come into
focus, at least for a few examples. There is a breed of sheep called a
Texel, and the kindest description would be that it’s chunky. The Texel
is well known for having a lot of muscle, which is a good thing in an
animal that’s being bred to be eaten. The muscularity of the breed has
been shown to be at least partially due to a change in a miRNA binding
site in the 3′ UTR of a specific gene. The protein coded for by this
gene is called myostatin, and it normally slows down muscle growth38.
The impact of the single base change is summarised in Figure 10.4. The
final size of the Texel sheep has been exaggerated for clarity.

[Fig-27.eps]

 

Figure 10.4 A single base change which is in a part of the myostatin
gene that does not code for protein nevertheless has a dramatic impact
on the phenotype in the Texel sheep breed. The presence of an A base
instead of a G in the myostatin mRNA leads to binding of two specific
miRNAs. This alters myostatin expression, resulting in sheep with very
pronounced muscle growth.

 

Tourette’s syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder where the patient
frequently suffers from involuntary convulsive movements (tics) which in
some cases are associated with involuntary swearing. Two unrelated
individuals with this disorder were shown to have the same single base
change in the 3′ UTR of a gene called SLITRK139. SLITRK1 appears to be
required for neuronal development. The base change in the Tourette’s
patients introduced a binding site for a short ncRNA called miR-189.
This suggests that SLITRK1 expression may be abnormally down-regulated
via such binding, at critical points in development. This alteration is
only present in a few cases of Tourette’s but raises the tantalising
suggestion that mis-regulation of miRNA binding sites in other neuronal
genes may be involved in other patients.

Earlier in this chapter we encountered the theory that ncRNAs may have
been vitally important for the development of increased brain complexity
and sophistication in humans. If that is the case, we might predict that
the brain would be particularly susceptible to defects in ncRNA activity
and function. Indeed, the Tourette’s cases in the previous paragraph
give an intriguing glimpse of such a scenario.

There is a condition in humans called DiGeorge syndrome in which a
region of about 3,000,000 bases has been lost from one of the two copies
of chromosome 2240. This region contains more than 25 genes. It’s
probably not surprising that many different organ systems may be
affected in patients with this condition, including genito-urinary,
cardiovascular and skeletal. Forty per cent of DiGeorge patients suffer
seizures and 25 per cent of adults with this condition develop
schizophrenia. Mild to moderate mental retardation is also common.
Different genes in the 3,000,000 base-pair region probably contribute to
different aspects of the disorder. One of the genes is called DGCR8 and
the DGCR8 protein is essential for the normal production of miRNAs.
Genetically modified mice have been created with just one functional
copy of Dgcr8. These mice develop cognitive problems, especially in
learning and spatial processing41. This supports the idea that miRNA
production may be important in neurological function.

We know that ncRNAs are important in the control of cellular
pluripotency and cellular differentiation. It’s not much of a leap from
that to hypothesise that miRNAs may be important in cancer. Cancer is
classically a disease in which cells can keep proliferating. This has
parallels with stem cells. Additionally, in cancer, the tumours often
look relatively undifferentiated and disorganised under the microscope.
This is in contrast to the fully differentiated and well-organised
appearance of normal, healthy tissues. There is now a strong body of
evidence that ncRNAs play a role in cancer. This role may involve either
loss of selected miRNAs or over-expression of other miRNAs, as shown in
Figure 10.5.

[Fig-28.eps]

 

Figure 10.5 Decreased levels of certain types of microRNAs, or increased
levels of others, may each ultimately have the same disruptive effect on
gene expression. The end result may be increased expression of genes
that drive cells into a highly proliferative state, increasing the
likelihood of cancer development.

 

Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia is the commonest human leukaemia.
Approximately 70 per cent of cases of this type of cancer42 have lost
the ncRNAs called miR-15a and miR-16-1. Cancer is a multi-step disease
and a lot of things need to go wrong in an individual cell before it
becomes cancerous. The fact that so many cases of this type of
leukaemia, the most common human leukaemia, lacked these particular
miRNAs suggested that loss of these sequences happened early in the
development of the disease.

An example of the alternative mechanism – over-expression of miRNAs in
cancer – is the case of the miR-17-92 cluster. This cluster is
over-expressed in a range of cancers43. In fact, a considerable number
of reports have now been published on abnormal expression of miRNAs in
cancer44. In addition, a gene called TARBP2 is mutated in some inherited
cancer conditions45. The TARBP2 protein is involved in normal processing
of miRNAs. This strengthens the case for a role of miRNAs in the
initiation and development of certain human cancers.

Hope or hype?

 

Given the increasing amounts of data suggesting a major role for miRNAs
in cancer, it isn’t surprising that scientists began to get excited
about the possibilities of using these molecules to treat cancer. The
idea would be to replace ‘missing’ miRNAs or to inhibit ones that were
over-expressed. The hope was that this could be achieved by dosing
cancer patients with the miRNAs, or artificial variants of them. This
could also have applications in other diseases where miRNA expression
may have become abnormal.

Big pharmaceutical companies are certainly investing heavily in this
area. Sanofi-Aventis and GlaxoSmithKline have each formed multi-million
dollar collaborations with a company called Regulus Therapeutics in San
Diego. They are exploring the development of miRNA replacements or
inhibitors, to use in the treatment of diseases ranging from cancer to
auto-immune disorders.

There are molecules very like miRNAs called siRNAs (small interfering
RNAs). They use much the same processes as miRNA molecules to repress
gene expression, especially degradation of mRNA. siRNAs have been used
as tools very extensively in research, as they can be administered to
cells in culture to switch off a gene for experimental investigations.
In 2006, the scientists who first developed this technology, Andrew Fire
and Craig Mello, were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology or
Medicine.

Pharmaceutical companies became very interested in using siRNAs as
potential new drugs. Theoretically, siRNA molecules could be used to
knock down expression of any protein that was believed to be harmful in
a disease. In the same year that Fire and Mello were awarded their Nobel
Prize, the giant pharmaceutical company Merck paid over one billion US
dollars for a siRNA company in California called Sirna Therapeutics.
Other large pharmaceutical companies have also invested heavily.

But in 2010 a bit of a chill breeze began to drift through the
pharmaceutical industry. Roche, the giant Swiss company, announced that
it was stopping its siRNA programmes, despite having spent more than
$500 million on them over three years. Its neighbouring Swiss
corporation, Novartis, pulled out of a collaboration with a siRNA
company called Alnylam in Massachusetts. There are still plenty of other
companies who have stayed in this particular game, but it would probably
be fair to say there’s a bit more nervousness around this technology
than in the past.

One of the major problems with using this kind of approach
therapeutically may sound rather mundane. Nucleic acids, such as DNA and
RNA, are just difficult to turn into good drugs. Most good existing
drugs – ibuprofen, Viagra, anti-histamines – have certain
characteristics in common. You can swallow them, they get across your
gut wall, they get distributed around your body, they don’t get
destroyed too quickly by your liver, they get taken up by cells, and
they work their effects on the molecules in or on the cells. Those all
sound like really simple things, but they’re often the most difficult
things to get right when developing a new drug. Companies will spend
tens of millions of dollars – at least – getting this bit right, and it
is still a surprisingly hit-and-miss process.

It’s so much worse when trying to create drugs around nucleic acids.
This is partly because of their size. An average siRNA molecule is over
50 times larger than a drug like ibuprofen. When creating drugs
(especially ones to be taken orally rather than injected) the general
rule is, the smaller the better. The larger a drug is, the greater the
problems with getting high enough doses into patients, and keeping them
in the body for long enough. This may be why a company like Roche has
decided it can spend its money more effectively elsewhere. This doesn’t
mean that siRNA won’t ever work in the treatment of illnesses, it’s just
quite high risk as a business venture. miRNA essentially faces all the
same problems, because the nucleic acids are so similar for both
approaches.

Luckily, there is usually more than one way to treat a cat and in the
next chapter, we’ll see how drugs targeting epigenetic enzymes are
already treating patients with severe cancer conditions.

  Chapter 11

 

  Fighting the Enemy Within

 

  The most exciting phrase to hear in science, the one that heralds new
  discoveries, is not ‘Eureka!’ (I found it!) but ‘That’s funny ...’

  Isaac Asimov

 

There are multiple instances in science of a relatively chance event
leading to a wonderful breakthrough. Probably the most famous example is
Alexander Fleming’s observation that a particular mould, that had
drifted by chance onto an experimental Petri dish, was able to kill the
bacteria growing there. It was this random event that led to the
discovery of penicillin and the development of the whole field of
antibiotics. Millions of lives have been saved as a result of this
apparently chance discovery.

Alexander Fleming won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in
1945, along with Ernst Chain and Howard Florey who worked out how to
make penicillin in large quantities so that it could be used to treat
patients. Isaac Asimov’s famous statement at the top of this page flags
up to us that Alexander Fleming wasn’t simply some fortunate man who
struck lucky. His insight wasn’t a fluke. It’s very unlikely that
Fleming was the first scientist whose bacterial cultures had become
infected with mould. His achievement came in recognising that something
unusual had happened, and appreciating its significance. Knowledge and
training had prepared Fleming’s mind to make the most of the chance
event. He saw what probably many others had seen before him but he
thought what nobody else had thought.

Even if we accept the role that odd events have played in research, it
would still be very comforting to think that science generally proceeds
in a logical and ordered fashion. Here’s one way we could imagine such
progress in epigenetics …

Epigenetic modifications control cell fate – it’s these processes by
which liver cells, for example, stay as liver cells and don’t turn into
other cell types. Cancer represents a breakdown in normal control of
cell fate, because liver cells stop being liver cells and become cancer
cells, suggesting that epigenetic regulation has become abnormal in
cancer. We should therefore aim to develop drugs that influence this
epigenetic mis-regulation. Such drugs may be useful for treating or
controlling cancer.

That’s a neat and tidy process, and makes a lot of sense. In fact,
hundreds of millions of dollars are being spent in the global
pharmaceutical industry to develop epigenetic drugs for exactly this
purpose. But the clear-cut thought process outlined above is not how
this process of cancer drug discovery started.

There are already licensed drugs which treat cancer and which work by
inhibiting epigenetic enzymes. These compounds were shown to be active
against cancer cells before they were shown to work on epigenetic
enzymes. In fact, it’s the success of these compounds that has really
stirred up interest in epigenetic therapies, and in the whole field of
epigenetics itself – so much for a neat narrative arc.

The accidental epigeneticist

 

Back in the early 1970s, a young South African scientist called Peter
Jones was working with a compound called 5-azacytidine. This compound
was already known to have anti-cancer effects because it could stop
leukaemia cells from dividing, and had some beneficial effects when
tested in childhood leukaemia patients1.

Peter Jones is now recognised as the founding father of epigenetic
treatments for cancer. Tall, thin, tanned and with thick close-cropped
white hair, he is an instantly recognisable presence at any conference.
Like so many of the terrific scientists mentioned in this book, he has
researched for decades in an ever-evolving field. He remains at the
forefront of efforts to understand the impact of the epigenome on
health. He is currently spearheading efforts to characterise all the
epigenetic modifications present in a vast number of different cell
types and diseases. These days he is able to call on technologies that
allow his team to analyse millions of read-outs from highly specific and
specialised equipment. Back in the early 1970s, he made his first
breakthrough by being incredibly observant and thorough – a classic case
of a prepared mind.

Forty years ago, nobody was quite sure how 5-azacytidine worked. It’s
very similar in chemical structure to base C (cytidine) from DNA and
RNA. It was assumed that 5-azacytidine got added into DNA and RNA
chains. Once there, it somehow disrupted normal copying of DNA, and
transcription or activity of RNA. Cancer cells such as the ones found in
leukaemia are extremely active. They need to synthesise lots of
proteins, which means they need to transcribe a lot of mRNA. Because
they divide quickly they also need to replicate their DNA very
efficiently. If 5-azacytidine was interfering with one or both of these
processes, it would probably hamper the growth and division of the
cancer cells.

Peter Jones and his colleagues were testing the effects of 5-azacytidine
on a range of cells from mammals. It’s remarkably fiddly to get many
types of cells to grow in the laboratory if you just take them straight
out of a human or another animal. Even when you can get them to grow,
they often stop dividing after a few cell divisions and die off. To get
around this, Peter Jones worked with cell lines. Cell lines are derived
originally from animals, including humans, but as a result of chance or
experimental manipulation, they are able to grow indefinitely in
culture, if given the right nutrients, temperature and environmental
conditions. Cell lines are not exactly the same as cells in the body,
but they are a useful experimental system.

The type of cells that Peter Jones and his colleagues were testing are
usually grown in a flat plastic flask. This looks a little like a
see-through version of a hip flask for whisky or brandy, lying on its
side. The mammalian cells grow on the flat inside surface of the flask.
They form a single layer of cells, tightly packed side by side, but
never growing on top of one another.

One morning, after the cells had been cultured with 5-azacytidine for
several weeks, the researchers found that there was a strange lumpy bit
in one of the culture flasks. To the naked eye, this initially looked
like a mould infection. Most people would just discard the flask and
make a silent promise to be a bit more careful when culturing their
cells in future, to stop this happening again. But Peter Jones did
something else. He looked at the lump more closely and discovered it
wasn’t a stray bit of mould at all. It was a big mass of cells, which
had fused to form giant cells containing lots of nuclei. These were
little muscle fibres, the syncytial tissue we met in the discussion of X
inactivation. Sometimes the little muscle fibres would even twitch2.

This was very odd indeed. Although the cell line had originally been
derived from a mouse embryo, it never usually formed anything like a
muscle cell. It tended instead to form epithelial cells – the cell type
that lines the surfaces of most of our organs. Peter Jones’ work showed
that 5-azacytidine could change the potential of these embryonic cells,
and force them to become muscle cells, instead of epithelial cells. But
why would a compound that killed cancer cells, presumably by disrupting
production of DNA and mRNA, have an effect like this?

Peter Jones carried on working on this when he moved from South Africa
to the University of Southern California. Two years later, he and his
PhD student Shirley Taylor showed that cell lines treated with
5-azacytidine didn’t only form muscle. They could also form other cell
types. These included fat cells (adipocytes) and cells called
chondrocytes. These produce cartilage proteins, such as those that line
the surfaces of joints so that the two planes can glide smoothly over
each other.

These data showed that 5-azacytidine wasn’t a special muscle-specifying
factor. Very presciently, Professor Jones made the suggestion in his
paper reporting this work that, ‘5-azacytidine … causes a reversion to a
more pluripotent state’3. In other words, this compound was pushing the
ball a little way back up Waddington’s epigenetic landscape. The ball
was then rolling back down the valleys between the hills, into a
different final resting place.

But there was still no theory as to why 5-azacytidine had this unusual
effect. Peter Jones himself tells a lovely self-deprecating story about
the turning point in our understanding. His original appointment at the
University of Southern California was in the Department of Paediatrics,
but he wanted a joint appointment with the Department of Biochemistry.
Part of the procedure for obtaining this joint appointment included an
extra interview, which he considered quite pointless. Peter Jones
described his work with 5-azacytidine in this interview and explained
that no-one knew why the compound affected cell pluripotency. Robert
Stellwagen, another scientist at the same university who was taking part
in the interview asked, ‘Have you thought of DNA methylation?’. Our
candidate admitted he not only hadn’t thought of it, he hadn’t even
heard of it4.

Peter Jones and Shirley Taylor immediately began to focus on DNA
methylation and in a very short time showed that this was indeed key to
the effects of 5-azacytidine. 5-azacytidine inhibited DNA methylation.
Peter Jones and Shirley Taylor created a number of related compounds and
tested them for their effects in cell culture. The ones that inhibited
DNA methylation also caused the changes in phenotype originally observed
for 5-azacytidine. Compounds that didn’t inhibit DNA methylation had no
effect on phenotype5.

The methylation cul-de-sac

 

Cytidine (base C) and 5-azacytidine are very similar in chemical
structure. They are shown in Figure 11.1, which for simplicity only
shows the most relevant parts of the structure (called cytosine and
5-azacytosine, respectively).

[Fig-29.eps]

 

Figure 11.1 5-azacytosine can be incorporated into DNA during the DNA
replication which takes place prior to cell division. 5-azacytosine
takes the place of a C base, but because it contains a nitrogen atom
where there is usually a carbon atom, the foreign base cannot be
methylated by DNMT1 in the way that was described in Figure 4.2.

 

The top half of the diagram is very similar to Figure 4.1, showing that
cytosine can be methylated by a DNA methyltransferase (DNMT1, DNMT3A or
DNMT3B) to create 5-methylcytosine. In 5-azacytosine, a nitrogen atom
(N) replaces the key carbon atom (C) that normally gets methylated. The
DNA methyltransferases can’t add a methyl group to this nitrogen atom.

Thinking back to Chapter 4, imagine a methylated region of DNA. When a
cell divides, it separates the two strands of the DNA double helix and
copies each one. But the enzymes that copy the DNA can’t themselves copy
DNA methylation. As a consequence each new double helix had one
methylated strand and one unmethylated one. The DNA methyltransferase
called DNMT1 can recognise DNA which has only got DNA methylation on one
strand and can replace it on the other strand. This restores the
original DNA methylation pattern.

But if dividing cells are treated with 5-azacytidine, this abnormal
cytidine base is added into the new strand of DNA as the genome gets
copied. Because the abnormal base contains a nitrogen atom instead of a
carbon atom, the DNMT1 enzyme can’t replace the missing methyl group. If
this continues as the cells keep dividing, the DNA methylation begins to
get diluted out.

Something else also happens when dividing cells are treated with
5-azacytidine. We now know that when DNMT1 binds at a region where the
DNA contains 5-azacytidine instead of the normal cytidine, the DNMT1
becomes stuck there6. This marooned enzyme is then sent to a different
part of the cell and is broken down. Because of this, the total levels
of DNMT1 enzyme in the cell fall7,8. The combination of this decrease in
the amount of DNMT1, and the fact that 5-azacytidine can’t be
methylated, means that the amount of DNA methylation in the cell keeps
dropping. We’ll come back in a little while to why this drop in DNA
methylation has an anti-cancer effect.

So, 5-azacytidine is an example of where an anti-cancer agent was
unexpectedly shown to work epigenetically. Bizarrely, a rather similar
thing happened with our second example of a compound which is now
licensed to treat cancer9.

Another happy accident

 

In 1971 the scientist Charlotte Friend showed that a very simple
compound called DMSO (its full name is dimethyl sulfoxide) had an odd
effect on the cancer cells from a mouse model of leukaemia. When these
cells were treated with DMSO, they turned red. This was because they had
switched on the gene for haemoglobin, the pigment that gives red blood
cells their colour10. Leukaemia cells normally never switch on this gene
and the mechanism behind this effect of DMSO was completely unknown.

Ronald Breslow at Columbia University and Paul Marks and Richard Rifkind
at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center were intrigued by Charlotte
Friend’s research. Ronald Breslow began to design and create a new set
of chemicals, using the structure of DMSO as his starting point, and
then adding or changing bits, a little like making new combinations of
Lego bricks. Paul Marks and Richard Rifkind began to test these
chemicals in various cell models. Some of the compounds had a different
effect from DMSO. They stopped cells from growing.

After many iterations, learning from each new and more complicated set
of structures, the scientists created a molecule called SAHA
(suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid). This compound was really effective at
stopping growth and/or causing cell death in cancer cell lines11.
However, it was another two years before the team were able to identify
what SAHA was doing in cells. The key moment happened more than 25 years
after Charlotte Friend’s breakthrough publication, when Victoria Richon
in Paul Marks’ team, read a 1990 paper from a group at the University of
Tokyo.

The Japanese group had been working on a compound called Trichostatin A
or TSA. TSA was known to be able to stop cells proliferating. The
Japanese group showed that treatment with TSA altered the extent to
which histone proteins are decorated with the acetyl chemical group in
cancer cell lines. Histone acetylation is another epigenetic
modification that we first met in Chapter 4. When cells were treated
with TSA, the levels of histone acetylation went up. This wasn’t because
the compound was activating the enzymes that put the acetyl groups on
histones. It was because TSA was inhibiting the enzymes that remove
acetyl groups from these chromatin proteins. These proteins are called
histone deacetylases, or HDACs for short12.

Victoria Richon compared the structure of TSA with the structure of
SAHA, and the two are shown in Figure 11.2.

[Fig-30.eps]

 

Figure 11.2 The structures of TSA and SAHA, with the areas of greatest
similarity circled. C: carbon; H: hydrogen; N: nitrogen; O: oxygen. For
simplicity, some carbon atoms have not been explicitly shown, but are
present where there is a junction of two lines.

 

You don’t need a chemistry degree to see that TSA and SAHA look fairly
similar, especially at the right hand side of each molecule. Victoria
Richon hypothesised that, just like TSA, SAHA was also an HDAC
inhibitor. In 1998, she and her colleagues published a paper that showed
this was indeed the case13. SAHA prevents HDAC enzymes from removing
acetyl groups from histone proteins, and as a result, the histones carry
lots of acetyl groups.

Beyond coincidence

 

So, 5-azacytidine and SAHA both decrease cancer cell proliferation, and
both inhibit the activity of epigenetic enzymes. Although we could take
this as promising support for the theory that epigenetic proteins are
important in cancer, perhaps we could just be leaping to conclusions? It
might just be a coincidence that both drugs affect epigenetic proteins.
After all, the enzymes targeted by the two compounds are very different.
5-azacytidine inhibits the DNMT enzymes, which add methyl groups to DNA.
SAHA, on the other hand, inhibits the HDAC family of enzymes, which
remove acetyl groups from histone proteins. Superficially, these seem
like very different processes. Maybe it’s just coincidence that both
5-azacytidine and SAHA inhibit epigenetic enzymes?

Epigeneticists believe that it is far from being a coincidence. DNA
methyltransferase enzymes add a methyl group to the cytidine base. High
concentrations of this base are found in the long CG-rich stretches of
DNA known as CpG islands. These islands are found upstream of genes, in
the promoter regions that control gene expression. When the DNA of a CpG
island is heavily methylated, the gene controlled by that promoter is
switched off. In other words, DNA methylation is a repressive
modification. DNMT activity increases DNA methylation and therefore
represses gene expression. By inhibiting these enzymes with
5-azacytidine, we can drive gene expression up.

Histone proteins are also found at the promoters of genes. Histone
modifications can be very complex, as we saw in Chapter 4. But histone
acetylation is the most straightforward in terms of its effects on gene
expression. If the histones upstream of a gene are heavily acetylated,
the gene is likely to be highly expressed. If the histones are lacking
acetylation, the gene is likely to be switched off. Histone
deacetylation is a repressive change. Histone deacetylases (HDACs)
remove the acetyl groups from histone proteins and will therefore
repress gene expression. By inhibiting these enzymes with SAHA, we can
drive gene expression up.

So there is a consistent finding. Our two unrelated compounds, which
control growth of cancer cells in culture and which have now been
licensed for use in human treatment, inhibit epigenetic enzymes. In
doing so, they both drive up gene expression which raises the obvious
question of why this is useful for treating cancer. To understand this,
we need to get to grips with some cancer biology.

Cancer biology 101

 

Cancer is the result of abnormal and uncontrolled proliferation of
cells. Normally, the cells of our body divide and proliferate at exactly
the right rate. This is controlled by a complex balancing act between
networks of genes in our cells. Certain genes promote cell
proliferation. These are sometimes referred to as proto-oncogenes. They
were represented by a plus sign in the see-saw diagram in the previous
chapter. Other genes hold the cell back, preventing too much
proliferation. These genes are called tumour suppressors. They were
represented by a negative sign on the same diagram.

Proto-oncogenes and tumour suppressors are not intrinsically good or
bad. In healthy cells, the activities of these two classes of genes
balance each other. But when regulation of these networks goes wrong,
cell proliferation may become mis-regulated. If a proto-oncogene becomes
over-active, it may push a cell towards a cancerous state. Conversely,
if a tumour suppressor gets inactivated, it will no longer act as a
brake on cell division. The outcome is the same in both cases – the cell
may begin to proliferate too rapidly.

But cancer isn’t just a result of too much cell proliferation. If cells
divide too quickly but are otherwise normal, they form structures called
benign tumours. These may be unsightly and uncomfortable but unless they
press on a vital organ and affect its activity, they are unlikely in
themselves to be fatal. In full-blown cancer the cells don’t just divide
too often, they are also abnormal and can start to invade other tissues.

A mole is a benign tumour. So is a little outgrowth in the inside of the
large intestine, called a polyp. Neither a mole nor a polyp is dangerous
in itself. The problem is that the more of these moles or polyps you
have, the greater the likelihood that one of them will go the next step,
and develop an abnormality that will take it further along the path
towards full-blown cancer.

This implies something rather important, that has been demonstrated in a
large number of studies. Cancer is not a one-off event. Cancer is a
multi-step process, where each additional step takes a cell further
along the road to becoming malignant. This is true even in cases where
patients inherit a very strong pre-disposition to cancer. One example is
pre-menopausal breast cancer, which runs in some families. Women who
inherit a mutated copy of a gene called BRCA1 are at very high risk of
early and aggressive breast cancer, which is difficult to treat
effectively. But even these women aren’t born with active breast cancer.
It takes many years before the cancer develops, because other defects
have to accumulate as well.

So, cells accumulate defects as they move increasingly close to becoming
cancerous. These defects must be transmitted from mother cell to
daughter cell, because otherwise they would be lost each time a cell
divided. These defects must be heritable as the cancer develops.
Understandably, for a very long time, the attention of the scientific
community focused on identifying mutations in the genes involved in the
development of cancer. They were looking for alterations in the genetic
code, the fundamental blueprint. They were particularly interested in
the tumour suppressor genes as these are the genes that are usually
mutated in the inherited cancer syndromes.

Humans tend to have two copies of each tumour suppressor gene, as most
are carried on the autosomes. As a cell becomes increasingly cancerous,
both copies of key tumour suppressor genes usually get switched off
(inactivated). In many cases this may be because the gene has mutated in
the cancer cells. This is known as somatic mutation – it has happened in
body cells at some point during normal life. These are called somatic
mutations to distinguish them from genetic mutations, the ones that are
transmitted from parent to child. The mutations that inactivate the two
copies of a tumour suppressor may be quite variable. In some cases there
may be changes in the amino acid sequence, so that the gene can’t
produce a functional protein any more. In other cases, there may be loss
of the relevant part of the chromosome in the increasingly cancerous
cells. In an individual patient, one copy of a specific tumour
suppressor may carry a mutation that changes the amino acid sequence and
the other may have suffered a micro-deletion.

It’s abundantly clear that these events do happen, and quite frequently,
but often it’s been difficult to identify exactly how a tumour
suppressor has mutated. In the last fifteen years, we’ve started to
realise that there is another way that a tumour suppressor gene can
become inactivated. The gene may be silenced epigenetically. If the DNA
at the promoter becomes excessively methylated or the histones are
covered in repressive modifications, the tumour suppressor will be
switched off. The gene has been inactivated without changing the
underlying blueprint.

The epigenetic frontier in cancer

 

Various labs have identified cancers where this has clearly happened.
One of the first reports was in a type of kidney cancer called
clear-cell renal carcinoma. A key step in the development of this kind
of cancer is the inactivation of a specific tumour suppressor gene
called VHL. In 1994, a group headed by the hugely influential Stephen
Baylin from Johns Hopkins Medical Institution in Baltimore analysed the
CpG island in front of the VHL gene. In 19 per cent of the clear-cell
renal carcinoma samples that they analysed, the DNA of the island was
hypermethylated. This switched off expression of this key tumour
suppressor gene, and was almost certainly a major event in cancer
progression in these individuals14.

Promoter methylation was not restricted to the VHL tumour suppressor and
renal cancer. Professor Baylin and colleagues subsequently analysed the
BRCA1 tumour suppressor gene in breast cancer. They analysed cases where
there was no family history of this disease, and the cancer wasn’t
caused by the mutations in BRCA1 that we discussed a few paragraphs ago.
In 13 per cent of these sporadic cases of breast cancer, the BRCA1 CpG
island was hypermethylated15. Broader abnormal patterns of DNA
methylation in cancer were reported by Jean-Pierre Issa from the MD
Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, in collaboration with Stephen Baylin.
Their collaborative work showed that over 20 per cent of colon cancers
had high levels of promoter DNA methylation, at many different genes
simultaneously16.

Follow-on work showed that it’s not just DNA methylation that changes in
cancer. There is also direct evidence for histone modifications leading
to repression of tumour suppressor genes. For example, the histones
associated with a tumour suppressor gene called ARHI had low levels of
acetylation in breast cancer17. A similar relationship exists for the
PER1 tumour suppressor in a form of lung cancer called non-small cell18.
In both cases, there was a relationship between the levels of histone
acetylation and the expression of the tumour suppressor – the lower the
levels of acetylation, the lower the expression of the gene. Because
these genes are both tumour suppressors, their decreased expression
would mean that the cell would find it harder to put the brakes on
proliferation.

This realisation – that tumour suppressor genes are often silenced by
epigenetic mechanisms – has led to considerable excitement in the field,
because this potentially creates a new way of treating cancer. If you
can turn one or more tumour suppressor genes back on in cancer cells,
there is a fighting chance of reining in the crazy proliferation rate of
those cells. The runaway train may not run away quite so fast down the
track.

When scientists thought that tumour suppressors were inactivated by
mutations or deletions, we didn’t have many options for turning these
genes back on. There are trials in progress to test if gene therapy can
be used to achieve this. There may be circumstances where gene therapy
will prove effective, but this is by no means certain. Gene therapy has
struggled to deliver on the initial hopes for this technology, in all
sorts of diseases. It can be very difficult to get the genes delivered
into the right cells, and to get them to switch on when they are there.
Even when we’re able to do this, we often find that the body gets rid of
these extra genes, so any initial benefit is lost. There have also been
relatively rare cases where the gene therapy itself has led to cancer,
because it has had unexpected effects which have led to increased cell
proliferation. The scientific community hasn’t given up hope for gene
therapy and for some conditions it may yet prove to be the right
approach19. But for diseases like cancer, where we would need to treat a
lot of people, it’s expensive and difficult.

That’s why there is so much excitement about the development of
epigenetic drugs to treat cancer. By definition, epigenetic changes do
not alter the underlying DNA code. As we have seen, there are patients
where one copy of a tumour suppressor has been silenced by the action of
epigenetic enzymes. In these patients the code for the normal tumour
suppressor protein has not been corrupted by mutation. So, for them
there is the possibility that treatment with appropriate epigenetic
drugs can reverse the abnormal pattern of DNA methylation or histone
acetylation. If we can achieve this, the normal tumour suppressor gene
will be switched back on, and this will help bring the cancer cells back
under control.

Two drugs that inhibit the DNMT1 enzyme have been licensed for clinical
use in cancer patients by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the
USA. These are 5-azacytidine (tradename Vidaza) and the closely related
2-aza-5′-deoxycytidine (tradename Dacogen). Two HDAC inhibitors have
also been licensed. These are SAHA (tradename Zolinza), which we met
earlier, and a molecule called romidepsin (tradename Istodax), which has
a very different chemical structure from SAHA, but which also inhibits
HDAC enzymes.

Following on from his successes in unravelling the molecular roles of
5-azacytidine, Peter Jones, along with Stephen Baylin and Jean-Pierre
Issa, has played a hugely influential role in the last 30 years in
moving this compound from the laboratory, all the way through clinical
trials and finally to the licensed product. Victoria Richon played a
major role in championing SAHA all the way through the same process.

The successful licensing of these four compounds against two different
types of enzymes has given a major boost to the whole field of
epigenetic therapies. But they have not proved to be universal wonder
drugs, the silver bullets to treat all cancers.

Stop looking for miracles

 

That hasn’t been a surprise to anyone working in the fields of cancer
research and treatment. There sometimes seems to be an obsessive
determination on the part of certain journalists in the popular press to
write about the cure for cancer. Generally speaking, scientists try to
avoid being too dogmatic, but if there’s one thing most of them are
agreed on, it’s that there will never be one single cure for cancer.

That’s because there isn’t one form of cancer. There are probably over a
hundred different diseases with this name. Even if we take just one
example – say breast cancer – we find that there are different types of
this particular strain of cancer. Some grow in response to the female
hormone called oestrogen. Some respond most strongly to a protein called
epidermal growth factor. The BRCA1 gene is inactivated or mutated in
some breast cancer cases, but not in others. Some breast cancers don’t
respond to any of the known cancer growth factors but to some other
signals which we may not even be able to identify yet.

Because cancer is a multi-step process, two patients whose cancers
appear very similar may be ill because of very different molecular
processes. Their cancers may have rather different combinations of
mutations, epigenetic modifications and other factors driving the growth
and aggressiveness of the tumour. This means that different patients are
likely to require different types and combinations of anti-cancer drugs.

Even allowing for this, however, the results from clinical trials with
DNMT and HDAC inhibitors have been surprising. Neither of them has yet
been shown to work well in solid tumours such as cancers of the breast,
colon or prostate. Instead, they are most effective against cancers that
have developed from cells that give rise to the circulating white blood
cells that are part of our defences against pathogens. These are
referred to as haematological tumours. It’s not clear why the current
epigenetic drugs don’t seem to be effective against solid tumours. It
might be that there are different molecular mechanisms at work in these,
compared with haematological cancers. Alternatively, it could be that
the drugs can’t get into solid tumours at high enough concentrations to
affect most of the cancer cells.

Even within haematological tumours, there are differences between the
DNMT and HDAC inhibitor drugs. Both DNMT inhibitors have been licensed
for use in a condition called myelodysplastic syndrome20,21. This is a
disorder of the bone marrow.

Both HDAC inhibitors have been licensed for a different kind of
haematological tumour, called cutaneous T cell lymphoma22. In this
disease, the skin becomes infiltrated with proliferating immunological
cells called T cells, creating visible plaques and large lesions.

Not every patient with myelodysplastic syndrome or cutaneous T cell
lymphoma gains a clinical benefit from taking these drugs. Even amongst
the patients who do respond, none of these drugs really seem to cure the
condition. If the patients stop taking the drugs, the cancer regains its
hold. The DNMT1 inhibitors and the HDAC inhibitors seem to rein in the
cancer cell growth, retarding and repressing it. They control rather
than cure.

However, this often represents a significant improvement for the
patients, bringing prolonged life expectancy and/or improved quality of
life. For example, many patients with cutaneous T cell lymphoma suffer
significant pain and distress because their lesions are constantly and
excruciatingly itchy. The HDAC inhibitors are often very effective at
calming this aspect of the cancer, even in patients whose survival times
aren’t improved by these drugs.

Generally speaking, it’s often very difficult to know which patients
will benefit from a specific new anti-cancer drug. This is one of the
biggest problems facing the companies working on new epigenetic
therapies for the treatment of cancer. Even now, several years after the
first licences were granted by the FDA for 5-azacytidine and SAHA, we
still don’t know why they work so much better in myelodysplastic
syndrome and cutaneous T cell lymphoma than in other cancers. It just so
happened that in the early clinical trials in humans, patients who had
these conditions responded more strongly than patients with other types
of cancers. Once the clinicians running the trials noticed this, later
trials were designed that focused around these patient groups.

This may not sound like a major difficulty. It might seem
straightforward for companies to develop drugs and then test them in all
sorts of cancers and with all sorts of combinations of other cancer
drugs, to work out how to use them best.

The problem with this is the expense. If we check out the website of the
National Cancer Institute, we can look for the number of trials that are
in progress for a specific drug. In February 2011, there were 88 trials
to test SAHA23. It’s difficult to get definitive costs for how much
clinical trials cost, but based on data from 2007, a value of $20,000
per patient is probably a conservative estimate24. Assuming each trial
contains twenty patients, this would mean that the costs just for
testing SAHA in the trials at the National Cancer Institute are over
$35,000,000. And this is almost certainly an under-estimate of the
overall cost.

The researchers at Columbia University and Memorial Sloan-Kettering who
first developed SAHA patented it. They then set up a company called Aton
Pharma to develop SAHA as a drug. In 2004, after promising early results
in cutaneous T cell lymphoma, Aton Pharma was bought by the giant
pharmaceutical company Merck for over $120 million dollars. Aton Pharma
had almost certainly spent millions of dollars to get SAHA to this
stage. Drug discovery and development is an expensive business. The two
companies that marketed the DNMT1 inhibitors have been bought relatively
recently by larger pharmaceutical companies, in deals that totalled
about $3 billion each25. If a company has paid a huge amount of money to
develop or buy in a new drug, it would much prefer not to carry on
spending like a drunken sailor when it comes to clinical trials.

Naturally, it would be a big improvement if we could run clinical trials
with a much better idea of which patients will benefit, rather than
having to take pot luck. Unfortunately, most researchers agree that many
of the animal models used to test cancer drugs are very limited in their
capacity to predict the most susceptible human cancer. To be fair, this
isn’t just true of cancer drugs targeted at epigenetic enzymes, it’s
also true of pretty much all oncology drug discovery.

In an attempt to get around this problem, researchers in both academia
and industry are now looking for the next generation of epigenetic
targets in oncology. DNMT1 is a relatively broad-acting enzyme. DNA
methylation is rather all or nothing – a CpG is methylated or it isn’t.
HDACs tend to be pretty non-discriminating too. If they can get access
to an acetylated lysine on a histone tail, they’ll take that acetyl
group off. There are a lot of lysines on a histone tail – there are are
seven on histone H3, just for starters. There are at least ten different
HDAC enzymes that SAHA can inhibit. It’s quite likely that each of these
ten can deacetylate any of the seven lysines on the H3 tail. This is
hardly what we would call fine-tuning.

No easy wins

 

This is why the field is now moving in the direction of assessing
different epigenetic enzymes, which are much more limited in their
actions, to see which are important players in different cancers. The
rationale is that it will be easier to understand the cellular biology
of enzymes with quite limited actions, and this will make it easier to
determine which patients are likely to respond best to which drugs.

The first problem in doing this is rather a daunting one. Which proteins
should we investigate? There are probably at least a hundred enzymes
that add or remove histone modifications (writers and erasers of the
epigenetic code). There are probably as many proteins that read the
epigenetic code. To make matters worse, many of these writers, erasers
and readers interact with each other. How can we begin to identify the
most promising candidates for new drug discovery programmes?

We don’t have any useful compounds like 5-azacytidine and SAHA to guide
us, so we have to rely on our relatively incomplete knowledge in cancer
and in epigenetics. One area that is proving useful is considering how
histone and DNA modifications work in tandem.

The most heavily repressed areas of the genome have high levels of DNA
methylation and are extremely compacted. The DNA has become very tightly
wound up, and is exceptionally inaccessible to enzymes that transcribe
genes. But it’s the question of how these regions become so heavily
repressed that is really important. The model is shown in Figure 11.3.

[Fig-31.eps]

 

Figure 11.3 Schematic to illustrate how different types of epigenetic
modifications act together to create an increasingly repressed and
tightly condensed chromosome region, making it very difficult for the
cell to express genes from this region.

 

In this model, there is a vicious cycle of events that results in the
generation of a more and more repressed state. One of the predictions
from this model is that repressive histone modifications attract DNA
methyltransferases, which deposit DNA methylation near those histones.
This methylation in turn attracts more repressive histone modifying
enzymes, creating a self-perpetuating cycle that leads to an
increasingly hostile region for gene expression.

Experimental data suggest that in many cases this model seems to be
right. Repressive histone modifications can act as the bait to attract
DNA methylation to the promoter of a tumour suppressor gene. A key
example of this is an epigenetic enzyme we met in the previous chapter,
called EZH2. The EZH2 protein adds methyl groups to the lysine amino
acid at position 27 on histone H3. This amino acid is known as H3K27. K
is the single letter code for lysine (L is the code for a different
amino acid called leucine).

This H3K27 methylation itself tends to switch off gene expression.
However, in at least some mammalian cell types, this histone methylation
recruits DNA methyltransferases to the same region of chromatin26,27.
The DNA methyltransferases include DNMT3A and DNMT3B. This is important
because DNMT3A and DNMT3B can carry out the process known as de novo DNA
methylation. That is, they can methylate virgin DNA, and create
completely new regions of highly repressed chromatin. As a result, the
cell can convert a relatively unstable repressive mark (H3K27
methylation) into the more stable DNA methylation.

Other enzymes are also important. An enzyme called LSD1 takes methyl
groups off histones – it’s an eraser of epigenetic modifications28. It
does this particularly strongly at position 4 on histone H3 (H3K4). H3K4
is the opposite of H3K27, because when H3K4 is clear of methyl groups,
genes tend to be switched off.

Unmethylated H3K4 can bind proteins, and one of these is called DNMT3L.
Perhaps not surprisingly, this is related to DNMT3A and DNMT3B. DNMT3L
doesn’t methylate DNA itself, but it attracts DNMT3A and DNMT3B to the
unmethylated H3K4. This provides another way to target stable DNA
methylation to virgin territory29.

In all likelihood, many histones positioned at the promoters of tumour
suppressor genes carry both of these repressive histone marks –
methylation of H3K27 and non-methylation of H3K4 – and these act
together to target the DNA methyltransferases even more strongly.

Both EZH2 and LSD1 are up-regulated in certain cancer types, and their
expression correlates with the aggressiveness of the cancer and with
poor patient survival30,31. Basically, the more active these enzymes,
the worse the prognosis for the patient.

So, histone modifications and DNA methylation pathways interact. This
may explain, at least in part, one of the mysteries of existing
epigenetic therapies. Why are compounds like 5-azacytidine and SAHA only
controllers of cancer cells, rather than complete destroyers?

In our model, treatment with 5-azacytidine will drive down the DNA
methylation for as long as the patients take the drug. Unfortunately,
many cancer drugs have serious side-effects and the DNMT inhibitors are
no exception. The side effects may eventually become such a problem that
the patient has to stop taking the drug. However, the patient’s cancer
cells probably still have histone modifications at the tumour suppressor
genes. Once the patient stops taking 5-azacytidine, these histone
modifications almost certainly start to attract the DNMT enzymes all
over again, re-initiating stable repression of gene expression.

Some researchers are carrying out clinical trials using 5-azacytidine
and SAHA together to try to interfere with this cycle, by disrupting
both the DNA and histone components of epigenetic silencing. It’s not
clear yet if these will be successful. If they aren’t, it might suggest
that it’s not low levels of histone acetylation which are most important
for re-establishing the DNA methylation. It might be that specific
histone modifications, of the types just described, are more important.
But we don’t yet have drugs to inhibit any of the other epigenetic
enzymes, so we’re stuck with Hobson’s choice at the moment, that is, no
choice at all.

In the future, we may not need to use DNMT inhibitors at all. The link
between DNA methylation and histone modifications in cancer isn’t
absolute. If a CpG island is methylated, the downstream gene is
repressed. But there are tumour suppressor genes that are downstream of
unmethylated CpG islands and tumour suppressor genes that don’t have a
CpG island at all. These genes may still be repressed, but solely thanks
to histone modifications32. This has been shown by Jean-Pierre Issa at
the MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, who has been so instrumental
in the implementation of epigenetic therapies in the clinic. In these
instances, if we can find the right epigenetic enzymes to target with
inhibitors, we may be able to drive re-expression of the tumour
suppressors without needing to worry about DNA methylation.

An uneasy truce

 

Is there something special about the tumour suppressor genes that get
silenced using epigenetic modifications? There are two contrasting
theories about this. The first is that there’s nothing special about
these genes and the process is completely random. In this model, every
once in a while a random tumour suppressor gets abnormally modified
epigenetically. If this changes the expression of the gene, it may mean
that cells with that epigenetic modification grow a bit faster or a bit
better than their neighbours. This gives the cells a growth advantage
and they keep outgrowing the cells around them, gradually accumulating
more epigenetic and genetic changes that make them ever more cancerous.

The other theory is that the tumour suppressors that become repressed
epigenetically are somehow targeted in this process. It’s not just
random bad luck, these genes are actually at a higher than average risk
of epigenetic silencing.

In recent years, as we’ve had the technology to profile the epigenetic
modifications in more and more cell types, and at higher and higher
resolutions, the field has shifted in favour of the second model. There
are a set of genes that seem to be rather prone to getting themselves
switched off epigenetically.

At first this seems incredibly counter-intuitive. Why on earth would
billions of years of evolution leave us with cellular systems that
render us prone to cancerous changes? Well, we have to put this in
context. Most evolutionary pressures are connected with the drive to
leave behind as many offspring as possible. For a human to reach
reproductive age, it’s incredibly important that early development occur
as efficiently as possible. After all, you can’t reproduce if you never
make it past the embryo stage. Once we’ve reached reproductive age and
had the opportunity to reproduce, there is little to be gained in
evolutionary terms in us staying alive for several decades afterwards.

Evolution has favoured cellular mechanisms that promote effective early
growth and development, including the production of multiple different
tissue types. Many of these tissue types contain reservoirs of stem
cells which are specific to that tissue. Our bodies need these for
tissue growth as we mature, and for tissue regeneration following
injury. The fates and identities of these tissue-specific stem cells are
controlled by the precise patterns of epigenetic modifications. By using
epigenetic modifications to control gene expression, the cells keep some
flexibility. They have the potential to change into more specialised
cells, for example. Perhaps even more importantly when considering
cancer, the epigenetic modifications also allow cells to divide to form
more stem cells. This is why we don’t run out of skin cells, or bone
marrow cells, even if we live to be a hundred years old.

This requirement for gene expression patterns that aren’t completely set
in stone is probably why epigenetic repression of tumour suppressor
genes is not a random process. We can’t have things two ways. Regulatory
systems that allow cells to be flexible are inevitably also systems that
allow cells to go wrong. In evolutionary terms, it’s the price we have
to pay for our Goldilocks scenario. Our epigenetic pathways make sure
some of our cells aren’t completely pluripotent or completely
differentiated. Instead, they are just right, hovering somewhere near
the top of Waddington’s epigenetic landscape, but ready to roll down at
any time.

Peter Laird, who like Peter Jones is based at the University of Southern
California, has shown the knock-on effects of this system in cancer
cells. His team analysed patterns of DNA methylation in cancer cells,
especially focusing on the promoters of tumour suppressor genes. Tumour
suppressor genes whose histones are methylated by the EZH2 complex in ES
cells were twelve times as likely to have abnormally high levels of DNA
methylation as those genes that aren’t targeted by EZH2. Peter Laird
described this effect very elegantly, saying, ‘reversible gene
repression is replaced by permanent silencing, locking the cell into a
perpetual state of self-renewal and thereby predisposing to subsequent
malignant transformation [sic].’33 This is consistent with the idea that
there is a stem cell aspect to cancer. If cells are locked into a stem
cell-like state, where they can’t differentiate into cells at the bottom
of the epigenetic landscape, they will be very dangerous because they
will always be able to keep on dividing to form yet more cells like
themselves.

Jean-Pierre Issa has described the genes that are epigenetically
silenced in colon cancer as the gatekeepers. They are frequently genes
whose normal role is to move the cells away from self-renewal, and into
fully differentiated cell types. Inactivation of these genes in cancer
locks the cells in a self-renewing stem cell-like state. This creates a
population of cells that are able to keep dividing, keep accumulating
further epigenetic changes and mutations, and keep inching towards a
full-blown cancer state34.

When we visualise the cells in Waddington’s landscape, it’s quite
difficult to visualise the ones that linger somewhere near the top.
That’s because instinctively we know that that’s a really unstable place
to be. A ball that has started rolling down a slope is always likely to
keep going, unless something can hold it back. And even if such a ball
does come to a halt, there’s always the chance it will start moving
again, rolling on down that hill.

What holds cells in this teetering position? In 2006, a group headed by
Eric Lander at the Broad Institute in Boston, found at least part of the
answer. A key set of genes in ES cells, the pluripotent cells we have
come to know so well, were found to have a really strange histone
modification pattern. These were genes that were very important for
controlling if an ES cell stayed pluripotent, or differentiated. Histone
H3K4 was methylated at these genes, which normally is associated with
switching on gene expression. H3K27 was also methylated. This is
normally associated with switching off gene expression. So, which
modification would turn out to be stronger? Would the genes be switched
on or off?

The answer turned out to be both. Or neither, depending on which way we
look at it. These genes were in a state called ‘poised’. Given the
slightest encouragement – a change in culture conditions that pushed
cells towards differentiation for example – one or other of these
methylations was lost. The gene was fully switched on, or strongly
repressed, depending on the epigenetic modification35.

This is really important in cancer. Stephen Baylin is the third person,
along with Peter Jones and Jean-Pierre Issa, who has done so much to
make epigenetic therapies a reality. He has shown that these poised
histone modifications are found in early cancer stem cells and are
really significant for setting the DNA methylation patterns in cancer
cells36.

Of course, other events must also be taking place. Many people do not
develop cancer, no matter what age they live to. Something must happen
in the people who do develop cancer, which results in the normal stem
cell pattern getting subverted and hardened so that the cells are locked
into their aggressively and abnormally proliferative state. We know that
environment can have a substantial impact on cancer risk (just think of
the hugely increased risk of lung cancer in smokers) but we’re not clear
on how or if the environment intersects with these epigenetic processes.

There may also be an aspect of pure bad luck in who develops cancer. We
probably all have random fluctuations in the levels, activity or
localisation of proteins that target, write, interpret and erase our
epigenetic codes. And there are the non-coding RNAs too.

The 3′ UTRs of both DNMT3A and DNMT3B mRNA contain binding sites for a
family of miRNAs called miR-29. Normally, these miRNAs will bind to the
DNMT3A and DNMT3B mRNA molecules and down-regulate them. In lung cancer,
the levels of these miRNAs drop and as a consequence DNMT3A and DNMT3B
mRNA and subsequently protein expression is elevated. This is likely to
increase the amount of de novo methylation of susceptible tumour
suppressor promoters37.

It is likely that there will also be feedback loops between miRNAs and
the epigenetic enzymes they control, if one component of the pathway
becomes mis-regulated. This will reinforce abnormal control mechanisms
in the cell, leading to yet another vicious cycle, and is shown in
Figure 11.4. In this example, a miRNA regulates a specific epigenetic
enzyme, which itself modifies the promoter of the miRNA. In this case,
the epigenetic enzyme creates a repressive modification.

[Fig-32.eps]

 

Figure 11.4 A positive feedback loop which constantly drives down
expression of a miRNA which would normally control expression of an
epigenetic enzyme that creates a repressed chromatin state.

 

There is still much that we need to understand if we are to develop the
next generation of epigenetic drugs to treat cancer patients. We need to
know which drugs will work best in which diseases and which patients
will benefit the most. We want to be able to work this out in advance,
so that we don’t have to hope for the best when running large numbers of
clinical trials. At least 5-azacytidine and SAHA have given us the
comfort of knowing that epigenetic therapy is possible in cancer, even
if improvements are needed.

As we shall see in the next chapter, epigenetic problems are not
restricted to cancer. But sadly we are even further away from knowing
how to use epigenetic therapies in one of the greatest unmet clinical
needs in the western world – psychiatric disease.

  Chapter 12

 

  All in the Mind

 

  The mind is its own place, and in itself can make a Heaven of Hell, a
  Hell of Heaven.

  John Milton

 

One of the most noticeable publishing trends of the last ten years has
been the rise and rise of the ‘misery memoir’. In this genre, the
authors recount the tough times of their childhood and how they have
risen above them to be successful and fulfilled individuals. The genre
can be sub-divided into two categories. The first is the poor-but-happy
tale, the ‘we had nothing but we had love’ story. The second, which may
or may not also include poverty, tends to be much more disturbing. It
focuses on harrowing tales of childhood neglect and childhood abuse, and
some of these memoirs have been hugely successful. A Child Called It by
Dave Pelzer, possibly the most famous of this category of books, spent
over six years on the New York Times bestsellers list.

A substantial amount of their appeal seems to lie in the
triumph-over-adversity aspects of these memoirs. Readers seem to take
heart from the stories of individuals who, despite a terrible start in
life, finally grow up to be happy, well-balanced adults. We applaud
those who become winners ‘against the odds’.

This tells us something quite revealing. It shows that, as a society, we
believe that early childhood events are extremely important in
influencing adult life. It also shows that we believe that it is very
difficult to get over the effects of early trauma. As a readership, we
possibly value these successful survivors because of what we perceive as
their relative rarity.

In many ways, we are correct in our assumptions as it is true that
dreadful early childhood experiences really can have a dramatic impact
on adult life. There are all sorts of ways in which this has been
measured and the precise figures may vary from study to study. Despite
this, certain clear trends have emerged. Childhood abuse and neglect
result in adults with a three times greater risk of suicide than the
general population. Abused children are at least 50 per cent more likely
than the general population to suffer from serious depression as adults,
and will find it much harder to recover from this illness. Adults who
were subjected to childhood abuse and neglect are also at significantly
higher risk of a range of other conditions including schizophrenia,
eating disorders, personality disorders, bipolar disease and generalised
anxiety. They are also more likely to abuse drugs or alcohol1.

An abusive or neglectful environment when young is clearly a major risk
factor for the development of later neuropsychiatric disorders. We are
so aware of this as a society that sometimes we almost forget to
question why this should be the case. It just seems self-evident. But
it’s not. Why should events that lasted for two years, for example,
still have adverse consequences for that individual several decades
later?

One explanation that is often given is that the children are
‘psychologically damaged’ by their early experiences. Whilst true, this
isn’t that helpful a statement. The reason why it’s not helpful is that
the phrase ‘psychologically damaged’ isn’t really an explanation at all
– it’s a description. It sounds quite convincing but on certain levels
it doesn’t really tell us anything.

Any scientist addressing this problem will want to take this description
and probe it at another level. What are the molecular events that
underlie this psychological damage? What happens in the brains of the
abused or neglected children, that leaves them so prone to mental health
problems as adults?

There is sometimes resistance to this approach from other disciplines,
which work within different conceptual frameworks. This seems rather
puzzling. If we don’t accept there is a molecular basis to a biological
effect, what are we left with? A religious person may prefer to invoke
the soul, just as a Freudian therapist may invoke the psyche. Both of
these refer to a theoretical construct that has no defined physical
basis. Moving into such a model system, where it is impossible to
develop the testable hypotheses that are the cornerstone of all
scientific enquiry, is deeply unattractive to most scientists. We prefer
to probe for a mechanism that has a physical foundation, rather than
defaulting to a scenario in which there is something which is assumed,
somehow, to be a part of us, without having any physical existence.

This can generate a cultural clash, but it’s one that’s based on a
misunderstanding. A scientist will expect that observable events have a
physical basis. For the topic of this chapter, our proposed hypothesis
is that terrible early childhood experiences change certain physical
aspects of the brain during a key developmental period. This in turn
affects the likelihood of mental health problems in adult life. This is
a mechanistic explanation. It’s lacking in details, admittedly, but
we’ll fill in some of these in this chapter. Mechanistic explanations
often sit uncomfortably in our society, because they sound too
deterministic. Mechanistic explanations are misinterpreted and taken to
imply that humans are essentially robots, wired and programmed to
respond in certain ways to certain stimuli.

But this doesn’t have to be the case. If a system has enough
flexibility, then one stimulus doesn’t always have to result in the same
outcome. Not every abused or neglected child develops into a vulnerable,
unwell adult. A phenomenon can have a mechanistic basis, without being
deterministic.

The human brain possesses sufficient flexibility to generate different
adult outcomes in response to similar childhood experiences. Our brains
contain one hundred billion nerve cells (neurons). Each neuron makes
links with ten thousand other neurons to form an incredible three
dimensional grid. This grid therefore contains a thousand trillion
connections – that’s 1,000,000,000,000,000 (a quadrillion). It’s hard to
imagine this, so let’s visualise each connection as a disc that’s 1mm
thick. Stack up the quadrillion discs on top of each other and they will
reach to the sun (which is ninety-three million miles from the earth)
and back, three times over.

That’s a lot of connections, so it’s perfectly possible to imagine that
our brains have a lot of flexibility. But the connections are not
random. There are networks of cells within the giant grid which are more
likely to link to each other than to anywhere else. It’s this
combination of huge flexibility, but constrained within certain
groupings, that is compatible with a system that is mechanistic but not
entirely deterministic.

The child is (epigenetically) father to the man

 

The reason scientists have hypothesised that the adult sequelae of early
childhood abuse may have an epigenetic component is that we’re dealing
with scenarios where a triggering event continues to have consequences
long after the trigger itself has disappeared. The long-term
consequences of childhood trauma are very reminiscent of many of the
effects that are mediated by epigenetic systems. We have seen some
examples of this already. Differentiated cells remember what cell type
they are, even after the signal that told them to become kidney cells or
skin cells has long since vanished. Audrey Hepburn suffered from
ill-health her whole life because of the malnutrition she suffered as a
teenager during the Dutch Hunger Winter. Imprinted genes get switched
off at certain stages in development, and stay off throughout the rest
of life. Indeed, epigenetic modifications are the only known mechanism
for maintaining cells in a particular state for exceptionally long
periods of time.

The hypothesis that epigeneticists are testing is that early childhood
trauma causes an alteration in gene expression in the brain, which is
generated or maintained (or both) by epigenetic mechanisms. These
epigenetically mediated abnormalities in gene expression predispose
adults to increased risk of mental illnesses.

In recent years, scientists have begun to generate data suggesting that
this is more than just an appealing hypothesis. Epigenetic proteins play
an important role in programming the effects of early trauma. Not only
that, they also are involved in adult depression, drug addiction and
‘normal’ memory.

The focus of a lot of research in this field has been a hormone called
cortisol. This is produced from the adrenal glands which sit on top of
the kidneys. Cortisol is produced in response to stress. The more
stressed we are, the more cortisol we produce. The average level of
cortisol production tends to be raised in adults who had traumatic
childhoods, even if the individuals are healthy at the time of
measurement2,3. What this shows is that adults who were abused or
neglected as children have higher background stress levels than their
contemporaries. Their systems are chronically stressed. The development
of mental illness is, in many cases, probably a little like the
development of cancer. A lot of things need to go wrong at the molecular
level before a person becomes clinically ill. The chronic stress levels
in the abuse survivors push them closer to that threshold. This
increases their vulnerability to disease.

How does this over-expression of cortisol happen? It’s a consequence of
events that happen far from the kidneys, in our brains. There is a whole
signalling cascade involved here. Chemicals produced in one region of
the brain act on other areas. These areas in turn produce other
chemicals in response and the process continues. Eventually a chemical
leaves the brain and signals to the adrenal glands and cortisol is
produced. During an abusive childhood, this signalling cascade is very
active. In many abuse survivors, this system keeps signalling as if the
person is still trapped in the abusive situation. It’s as if the
thermostat on a central heating system has malfunctioned, and the boiler
and radiators continue to pump out heat in August, based on the weather
from the previous February.

The process starts in a region of the brain called the hippocampus,
which gets its name from the ancient Greek term for seahorse, it being
shaped a little like this creature. The hippocampus acts as a master
switch in controlling how much the cortisol system becomes activated.
This is shown in Figure 12.1. In this figure, a plus symbol indicates
that one event acts to stimulate the next link in the chain. A minus
symbol shows the opposite effect, where one event decreases the level of
activity of the next event in the chain.

[Fig-33.eps]

 

Figure 12.1 Signalling events in response to stress set up a cascade of
events in selected regions of the brain that ultimately result in
release of the stress hormone cortisol from the adrenal glands. Under
normal circumstances, this system is controlled by a set of negative
feedback loops that act to dampen down and limit the activation of the
stress response pathways.

 

Because of changes in the activities of the hippocampus in response to
stress, the hypothalamus produces and releases two hormones, called
corticotrophin-releasing hormone and arginine vasopressin. These two
hormones stimulate the pituitary, which responds by releasing a
substance called adrenocorticotrophin hormone which gets into the
bloodstream. When the cells of the adrenal gland take up this hormone,
they release cortisol.

There’s a clever mechanism built in to this system. Cortisol circulates
around the body in the bloodstream, and some of it goes back into the
brain. The three brain structures shown in our diagram all carry
receptors that recognise cortisol. When cortisol binds to these
receptors, it creates a signal that tells these structures to calm down.
It’s particularly important for this to happen at the hippocampus, as
this structure can send out signals to dampen down all the others
involved in this signalling. This is a classic negative feedback loop.
Production of cortisol feeds back on various tissues, and the final
effect is that the production of cortisol declines. This stops us from
being constantly over-stressed.

But we know that adults who suffered traumatic childhoods are actually
over-stressed. They produce too much cortisol, all the time. Something
must be going wrong in this feedback loop. There are a few studies in
humans that show that this is the case. These studies examined the
levels of corticotrophin-releasing hormone in the fluid bathing the
brain and spinal cord. As predicted, the levels of
corticotrophin-releasing hormone were higher in individuals who had
suffered childhood abuse than in individuals who hadn’t. This was true
even when the individuals were healthy at the time of the
experiments4,5. Because it’s so hard to investigate this fully in
humans, a lot of the breakthroughs in this field have come from using
animal models of certain conditions and then correlating them where
possible with what we know from human cases.

Relaxed rats and mellow mice

 

A useful model has been based around the mothering skills of rats. In
the first week of their lives, rat babies love being licked and groomed
by their mothers. Some mothers are naturally very good at this, others
not so much so. If a mother is good at it, she’s good at it in all her
pregnancies. Similarly, if she’s a bit lackadaisical at the licking and
grooming, this is true for every litter she has.

If we test the offspring of these different mothers when the pups are
older and independent, an interesting effect emerges. When we challenge
these now adult rats with a mildly stressful situation, the ones that
were licked and groomed the most stay fairly calm. The ones that were
relatively deprived of ‘mother love’ react very strongly to even mild
stress. Essentially, the rats that had been licked and groomed the most
as babies were the most chilled out as adults.

The researchers carried out experiments where newborn rats were
transferred from ‘good’ mothers to ‘bad’ and vice versa. These
experiments showed that the final responses of the adults were
completely due to the love and affection they received in the first week
of life. Babies born to mothers who were lacklustre lickers and groomers
grew up nicely chilled out if they were fostered by mothers who were
good at this.

The low stress levels of the adult rats that had been thoroughly
nurtured as babies were shown by measuring their behaviour when they
were challenged by mild stimuli. They were also monitored hormonally,
and the effects were as we would expect. The chilled-out rats had lower
levels of corticotrophin-releasing hormone in their hypothalamus and
lower levels of adrenocorticotrophin hormone in their blood. Their
levels of cortisol were also low, compared with the less nurtured
animals.

The key molecular factor in dampening down the stress responses in the
well-nurtured rats was the expression of the cortisol receptor in the
hippocampus. In these rats, the receptor was highly expressed. As a
result, the cells of the hippocampus were very efficient at catching
even low amounts of cortisol, and using this as the trigger to subdue
the downstream hormonal pathway, through the negative feedback loop.

This showed that levels of the cortisol receptor stayed high in the
hippocampus, many months after the all-important licking and grooming of
the baby rats. Essentially, events that only happened for seven days
immediately after birth had an effect that lasted for pretty much all of
a rat’s life.

The reason the effect was so long-lasting is that the initial stimulus –
being licked and groomed by the mother – set off a chain of events that
led to epigenetic changes to the cortisol receptor gene. These changes
occurred very early in development when the brain was at its most
‘plastic’. By plastic, we mean that this is the time when it’s easiest
to modify the gene expression patterns and cellular activities. As the
animals get older, these patterns stay set in place. That’s why the
first week in rats is so critical.

The changes that take place are shown in Figure 12.2. When a baby rat is
licked and groomed a lot, it produces serotonin, one of the feel-good
chemicals in mammalian brains. This stimulates expression of epigenetic
enzymes in the hippocampus, which ultimately results in decreased DNA
methylation of the cortisol receptor gene. Low levels of DNA methylation
are associated with high levels of gene expression. Consequently, the
cortisol receptor is expressed at high levels in the hippocampus, and
can keep the rats relatively relaxed6.

This is a very interesting model to explain how early life events can
influence long-term behaviour. But it seems unlikely that just one
epigenetic alteration – even one as significant as DNA methylation
levels at a very important gene in a critical brain region – could be
the only answer. Five years after the work described above, another
paper was published by a different group. This also showed the
importance of epigenetic changes but in a different gene.

The later group used a mouse model of early-life stress. In this model,
baby mice were taken away from their mothers for three hours a day, for
the first ten days of their lives. Just like the baby rats that hadn’t
been licked or groomed much, these babies developed into ‘high-stress’
adults. Cortisol levels were increased in these mice, especially in
response to mild stress, just like the relatively neglected rats.

The researchers working on the mice studied the arginine vasopressin
gene. Arginine vasopressin is secreted by the hypothalamus, and
stimulates secretion from the pituitary. It is shown in Figure 12.1. The
stressed-out mice, those that had suffered separation from their mothers
in early life, had decreased DNA methylation of the arginine vasopressin
gene. This resulted in increased production of arginine vasopressin,
which stimulated the stress response7.

[Fig-34.eps]

 

Figure 12.2 Strong nurturing of baby rats sets up a cascade of molecular
events that result in increased expression of the cortisol receptor in
the brain. This increased expression makes the brain very effective at
responding to cortisol and down-regulating stress responses via the
negative feedback loop described in Figure 12.1.

 

The rat and mouse experimental studies show us two important things. The
first is that when early life events lead to adult stress, there is
probably more than one gene involved. Both the cortisol receptor gene
and the arginine vasopressin gene can contribute to this phenotype in
rodents.

Secondly, the studies also show us that a particular class of epigenetic
modification is not in itself good or bad. It’s where the modification
happens that matters. In the rat model, the decreased DNA methylation of
the cortisol receptor gene is a ‘good’ thing. It leads to increased
production of this receptor, and a general dampening down of the stress
response. In the mouse model, the decreased DNA methylation of the
arginine vasopressin gene is a ‘bad’ thing. It leads to increased
expression of this hormone and a stimulation of the stress response.

The decreased DNA methylation of the arginine vasopressin gene in the
mouse model occurred through a different route to the one used in the
rat hippocampus to activate the cortisol receptor gene.

In the mouse studies, separation from the mother triggered activity of
the neurons in the hypothalamus. This set off a signalling cascade that
affected the MeCP2 protein. MeCP2 is the protein we met in Chapter 4,
which binds to methylated DNA and helps repress gene expression. It’s
also the gene which is mutated in Rett syndrome, the devastating
neurological disorder. Adrian Bird has shown that the MeCP2 protein is
incredibly highly expressed in neurons8.

Normally, MeCP2 protein binds to the methylated DNA at the arginine
vasopressin gene. But in the stressed baby mice, the signalling cascade
mentioned in the previous paragraph adds a small chemical group called a
phosphate to the MeCP2 protein and because of this MeCP2 falls off the
arginine vasopressin gene. One of the important roles of MeCP2 is
attracting other epigenetic proteins to where it is bound on a gene.
These are proteins that all cooperate to add more and more repressive
marks to that region of the genome. When the phosphorylated MeCP2 falls
off the arginine vasopressin gene, it can no longer recruit these
different epigenetic proteins. Because of this, the chromatin loses it
repressive marks. Activating modifications get put on instead, such as
high levels of histone acetylation. Ultimately, even the DNA methylation
is permanently lost.

Amazingly this all happens in the mice in the first ten days after
birth. After that, the neurons essentially lose their plasticity. The
DNA methylation pattern that’s in place at the end of this stage becomes
the stable pattern at this location. If the DNA methylation levels are
low, this will normally be associated with abnormally high expression of
the arginine vasopressin gene. In this way, the early life events
trigger epigenetic changes which get effectively ‘stuck’. Because of
this, the animal continues to be highly stressed, with abnormal hormone
production, long after the initial stress has vanished. Indeed, the
response continues long after the animal would even normally ‘care’
about whether or not it has its mother’s company. After all, mice are
not renowned for hanging about to look after their ageing parents.

In the depths

 

Researchers are gradually gathering data that suggest some of the
changes seen in the rodent models of early stress may be relevant in
humans. As mentioned earlier, there are logistical, but more importantly
ethical, issues which make it impossible to perform the same kinds of
studies in people. Even so, some intriguing correlations are emerging.

The original work in the rat model was carried out by Professor Michael
Meaney at McGill University in Montreal. His group subsequently
performed some interesting studies on human brain samples from
individuals who had, sadly, committed suicide. The group analysed the
levels of DNA methylation at the cortisol receptor gene in the
hippocampus from these cases. Their data showed that the DNA methylation
tended to be higher in the samples from people who had had a history of
early childhood abuse or neglect. By contrast, the DNA methylation
levels at this gene were relatively low in the suicide victims who had
not had traumatic childhoods9. The high DNA methylation levels in the
abuse victims would drive down expression of the cortisol receptor gene.
This would make the negative feedback loop less efficient and raise the
circulating levels of cortisol. This was consistent with the findings
from the rat work, where the stressed-out animals from the less
nurturing mothers had high levels of DNA methylation at the cortisol
receptor gene in the hippocampus.

Of course, it isn’t just people who have had abusive childhoods who
develop mental illnesses. The global figures for depression are
startling. The World Health Organisation estimates that over 120 million
people worldwide are affected by depression. Depression-related suicides
have reached 850,000 per annum and depression is predicted to become the
second greatest contributor to the global disease burden by 202010.

Effective treatment for depression took a big step forwards in the early
1990s with the licensing by the US Food and Drug Administration of a
class of drugs called SSRIs – selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors.
Serotonin is a neurotransmitter molecule – it conveys signals between
neurons. Serotonin is released in the brain in response to pleasurable
stimuli; it’s the feel-good molecule that we met in our happy rat
babies. The levels of serotonin are low in the brains of people
suffering from depression. SSRI drugs raise the levels of serotonin in
the brain.

It makes sense that drugs that cause an increase in serotonin levels
would be useful in treating depression. But there’s something odd about
their action. The serotonin levels in the brain rise quite quickly when
patients are treated with the SSRI drugs. But it usually takes at least
four to six weeks before the terrible symptoms of severe depression
begin to lift.

This suggests that there is more to depression than simply a drop in the
levels of a single chemical in the brain, which perhaps isn’t that
surprising. It’s very unusual for depression to happen overnight – it’s
not like coming down with the flu. There’s now a reasonable amount of
data showing that there are much longer-term changes in the brain as
depression develops. These include alterations in the numbers of
contacts that neurons make with each other. This in turn is critically
dependent on the levels of chemicals called neurotrophic factors11.
These chemicals support healthy survival and function of brain cells.

Researchers in the depression field have moved away from a simple model
based on levels of neurotransmitters and into a more complex network
system. This involves sophisticated interactions between neuronal
activity and a whole range of other factors. These include stress,
production of neurotransmitters, effects on gene expression and
longer-term consequences for neurons and how they interact with each
other. While this system is in balance, the brain functions healthily.
If the system moves out of balance, this complicated network begins to
unravel. This moves the brain’s biochemistry and function further away
from health and closer to dysfunction and disease.

Scientists are beginning to focus their attention in this field on
epigenetics, because of its potential to create and sustain long-lasting
patterns of gene expression. Rodents are the most common model system
for these investigations. Because a mouse or a rat can’t tell you how
it’s feeling, researchers have created certain behavioural tests that
are used to model different aspects of human depression.

We all recognise that different people seem to respond to stress in
different ways. Some people seem fairly robust. Others can react really
badly to the same stressful situation, even developing depression. Mice
from different inbred strains are like this as well. Researchers exposed
two different strains to mildly stressful stimuli. After the stressful
situation, the researchers assessed the behaviour of the mice in some of
the tests which mimic certain aspects of human depression. One strain
was relatively non-anxious, whereas the other was relatively anxious.
These strains were called B6 and BALB, but we’ll called them ‘chilled’
and ‘jumpy’, respectively, for convenience.

The researchers focused their studies on a region of the brain called
the nucleus accumbens. This region plays a role in various emotionally
important brain functions. These include aggression, fear, pleasure and
reward. The researchers analysed the expression of various neurotrophic
factors in the nucleus accumbens. The one that gave the most interesting
results was a gene called Gdnf (glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor).

Stress caused an increase in expression of the Gdnf gene in the chilled
mice. In the jumpy strain it caused a decrease in expression of the same
gene. Now, different inbred strains of mice can have different DNA codes
so the researchers analysed the promoter region, which controls the
expression of Gdnf. The DNA sequence of the Gdnf promoter was identical
in the chilled and the jumpy strains. But when the scientists examined
the epigenetic modifications in this promoter, they found a difference.
The histones of the jumpy mice had fewer acetyl groups than the histones
of the chilled mice. As we’ve seen, low levels of histone acetylation
are associated with low levels of gene expression, so this tied up well
with the decreased Gdnf expression in the jumpy mice.

This led the scientists to wonder what had happened in the neurons of
the nucleus accumbens. Why had the levels of histone acetylation dropped
at the Gdnf gene in the jumpy mice? The scientists examined the levels
of the enzymes that add or remove acetyl groups from histones. They
found only one difference between the two strains of mice. A specific
histone deacetylase (member of the class of proteins which removes
acetyl groups) called Hdac2 was much more highly expressed in the
neurons of the jumpy mice12, compared with the chilled out mice.

Other researchers tested mice in a different model of depression, called
social defeat. In these experiments, mice are basically humiliated.
They’re put in an environment where they can’t get away from a bigger,
scarier mouse, although they are removed before they come to any
physical harm. Some mice find this really stressful; others seem to
brush it off.

In the experiments adult mice underwent ten days of social defeat. At
the end of this they were classified as either susceptible or resistant,
depending on how well they bounced back from the experience. Two weeks
later the mice were examined. The resistant mice had normal levels of
corticotrophin-releasing hormone. This is the chemical released by the
hypothalamus. It’s the one which ultimately stimulates the production of
cortisol, the stress hormone. The susceptible mice had high levels of
corticotrophin-releasing hormone and low levels of DNA methylation at
the promoter of this gene. This was consistent with the high levels of
expression from this gene. They also had low levels of Hdac2, and high
levels of histone acetylation, which again fits with over-expression of
the corticotrophin-releasing hormone13.

It might seem odd that in one model system Hdac2 levels went up in the
susceptible mice, whereas in another they went down. But it’s important
with all these epigenetic events to remember that context is everything.
There isn’t just one way in which Hdac2 levels (or those of any other
epigenetic gene, for that matter) are controlled. The control will
depend on the region of the brain and the precise signalling pathways
that are activated in response to a stimulus.

The drugs do work

 

There’s more evidence supporting a significant role for epigenetics in
responses to stress. The naturally jumpy B6 mice were the ones with the
increased expression of Hdac2 in the nucleus accumbens, and decreased
expression from the Gdnf gene. We can treat these mice with SAHA, the
histone deacetylase inhibitor. SAHA treatment leads to increased
acetylation of the Gdnf promoter. This is associated with increased
expression of the Gdnf gene. The crucial finding is that the treated
mice stop being jumpy and become chilled instead14 – changing the
histone acetylation levels of the gene changed the mouse’s behaviour.
This supports the idea that histone acetylation is really important in
modulating the responses of these mice to stress.

One of the tests used to investigate how depressed the mice become in
response to stress is called the sucrose-preference test. Normal happy
mice love sugared water, but when they are depressed they aren’t so
interested in it. This decreased response to a pleasant stimulus is
called anhedonia. It seems to be one of the best surrogate markers in
animals for human depression15. Most people who have been severely
depressed talk about losing interest in all the things that used to make
life joyful before they became ill. When the stressed mice were treated
with SSRI anti-depressants, their interest in the sugared water
gradually increased. But when they were treated with SAHA, the HDAC
inhibitor, they regained their interest in their favourite drink much
faster16.

It’s not just in the jumpy or chilled mice that histone deacetylase
inhibitors can change animal behaviour. It’s also relevant to the baby
rats who don’t get much maternal licking and grooming. These are the
ones that normally grow up to be chronically stressed, with
over-activation of the cortisol production pathway. If these ‘unloved’
animals are treated with TSA, the first histone deacetylase inhibitor to
be identified, they grow up much less stressed. They react much more
like the animals who received lots of maternal care. The levels of DNA
methylation at the cortisol receptor gene in the hippocampus go down,
increasing expression of the receptor and improving the sensitivity of
the all-important negative feedback loop. This is presumed to be because
of cross-talk between the histone acetylation and DNA methylation
pathways17.

In the social defeat model in mice, the susceptible animals were treated
with an SSRI anti-depressant drug. After three weeks of treatment, their
behaviour was much more like that of the resilient mice. But treatment
with this anti-depressant drug didn’t just result in increased levels of
serotonin in the brain. The anti-depressant treatment also led to
increased DNA methylation at the promoter of the
corticotrophin-releasing hormone.

These studies are all very consistent with a model where there is
cross-talk between the immediate signals from the neurotransmitters, and
the longer-term effects on cell function mediated by epigenetic enzymes.
When depressed patients are treated with SSRI drugs, the serotonin
levels in the brain begin to rise, and signal more strongly to the
neurons. The animal work described in the last paragraph suggests that
it takes a few weeks for these signals to trigger all the pathways that
ultimately result in the altered pattern of epigenetic modifications in
the cells. This stage is essential for restoring normal brain function.

Epigenetics is also a reasonable hypothesis to explain another
interesting but distressing feature of severe depression. If you have
suffered from depression once, you are at a significantly higher risk
than the general population of suffering from it again at some time in
the future. It’s likely that some epigenetic modifications are
exceptionally difficult to reverse, and leave the neurons primed to be
more vulnerable to another bout.

The jury’s out

 

So far, so good. Everything looks very consistent with our theory about
life experiences having sustained and long-lasting effects on behaviour,
through epigenetics. And yet, here’s the thing: this whole area,
sometimes called neuro-epigenetics, is probably the most scientifically
contentious field in the whole of epigenetic research.

To get a sense of just how controversial, consider this. We’ve met
Professor Adrian Bird in this book before. He is acknowledged as the
father of the DNA methylation field. Another scientist with a very
strong reputation in the science behind DNA methylation is Professor Tim
Bestor from Columbia University Medical Center in New York. Adrian and
Tim are about the same age, of similar physical type, and both are
thoughtful and low key in conversation. And they seem to disagree on
almost every issue in DNA methylation. Go to any conference where they
are both scheduled in the same session and you are guaranteed to witness
inspiring and impassioned debate between the two men. Yet the one thing
they both seem to agree on publicly is their scepticism about some of
the reports in the neuro-epigenetics field18.

There are three reasons why they, and many of their colleagues, are so
sceptical. The first is that many of the epigenetic changes that have
been observed are relatively small. The sceptics are unconvinced that
such small molecular changes could lead to such pronounced phenotypes.
They argue that just because the changes are present, it doesn’t mean
they’re necessarily having a functional effect. They worry that the
alterations in epigenetic modifications are simply correlative, not
causative.

The scientists who have been investigating the behavioural responses in
the different rodent systems counter this by arguing that molecular
biologists are too used to quite artificial experimental models, where
they can study extensive molecular changes with very on-or-off
read-outs. The behaviourists suspect that this has left molecular
biologists relatively inexperienced at interpreting real-world
experiments, where the read-outs tend to be more ‘fuzzy’ and prone to
greater experimental variation.

The second reason for scepticism lies in the very localised nature of
the epigenetic changes. Infant stress affects specific regions of the
brain, such as the nucleus accumbens, and not other areas. Epigenetic
marks are only altered at some genes and not others. This seems less of
a reason for scepticism. Although we refer to ‘the brain’, there are
lots of highly specialised centres and regions within this organ, the
product of hundreds of millions of years of evolution. Somehow, all
these separate regions are generated and maintained during development
and beyond, and thus are clearly able to respond differently to stimuli.
This is also the case for all our genes, in all our tissues. It’s true
that we don’t really know how epigenetic modifications can be targeted
so precisely, or how the signalling from chemicals like
neurotransmitters leads to this targeting. But we know that similarly
specific events occur during normal development – so why not during
abnormal periods of stress or other environmental disturbances? Just
because we don’t know the mechanism for something, it doesn’t mean it
doesn’t happen. After all, John Gurdon didn’t know how adult nuclei were
reprogrammed by the cytoplasm of eggs, but that didn’t mean his
experimental findings were invalid.

The third reason for scepticism is possibly the most important and it
relates to DNA methylation itself. DNA methylation at the target genes
in the brain is established very early, possibly pre-natally but
certainly within one day of birth, in rodents. What this means is that
the baby mice or baby rats in the experiments all started life with a
certain baseline pattern of DNA methylation at their cortisol receptor
gene in the hippocampus. The DNA methylation levels at this promoter
alter in the first week of life, depending on the amount of licking and
grooming the rats receive. As we saw, the DNA methylation levels are
higher in the neglected mice than in the loved ones. But that’s not
because the DNA methylation has gone up in the neglected mice. It’s
because DNA methylation has gone down in the ones that were licked and
groomed the most. The same is also true at the arginine vasopressin gene
in the baby mice removed from their mothers. It’s also true for the
corticotrophin-releasing hormone gene in the adult mice that were
susceptible to social defeat.

So, in every case, what the scientists observed was decreased DNA
methylation in response to a stimulus. And that’s where, molecularly,
the problem lies, because no-one knows how this happens. In Chapter 4 we
saw how copying of methylated DNA results in one strand that contains
methyl groups and one that doesn’t. The DNMT1 enzyme moves along the
newly synthesised strand and adds methyl groups to restore the
methylation pattern, using the original strand as a template. We could
speculate that in our experimental animals, there was less DNMT1 enzyme
present and so the methylation levels at the gene dropped. This is
referred to as passive DNA demethylation.

The problem is that this can’t work in neurons. Neurons are terminally
differentiated – they are right at the bottom of Waddington’s landscape,
and cannot divide. Because they don’t divide, neurons don’t copy their
DNA. There’s no reason for them to do so. As a result, they can’t lose
their DNA methylation by the method described in Chapter 4.

One possibility is that maybe neurons simply remove the methyl group
from DNA. After all, histone deacetylases remove acetyl groups from
histones. But the methyl group on DNA is different. In chemical terms,
histone acetylation is a bit like adding a small Lego brick onto a
larger Lego brick. It’s pretty easy to take the two bricks apart again.
DNA methylation isn’t like that. It’s more like having two Lego bricks
and using superglue to stick them together.

The chemical bond between a methyl group and the cytosine in DNA is so
strong that for many years it was considered completely irreversible. In
2000, a group from the Max Planck Institute in Berlin demonstrated that
this couldn’t be the case. They showed that in mammals the paternal
genome undergoes extensive DNA demethylation, during very early
development. We came across this in Chapters 7 and 8. What we glossed
over at the time was that this demethylation happens before the zygote
starts to divide. In other words, the DNA methylation was removed
without any DNA replication19. This is referred to as active DNA
demethylation.

This means there is a precedent for removing DNA methylation in
non-dividing cells. Perhaps there’s a similar mechanism in neurons.
There’s still a lot of debate about how DNA methylation is actively
removed, even in the well-established events in early development.
There’s even less consensus about how it takes place in neurons. One of
the reasons this has been so hard to investigate is that active DNA
demethylation may involve a lot of different proteins, carrying out a
number of steps one after another. This makes it very difficult to
recreate the process in a lab, which is the gold standard for these
kinds of investigations.

Silencing the silencer

 

As we’ve seen repeatedly, scientific research often throws up some very
unexpected findings and so it happened here. While many people in
epigenetics were looking for an enzyme that removed DNA methylation, one
group discovered enzymes that added something extra to methylated DNA.
This is shown in Figure 12.3. Very surprisingly, this has turned out to
have many of the same consequences as demethylating the nucleic acid.

[Fig-35.eps]

 

Figure 12.3 Conversion of 5-methylcytosine to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine.
C: carbon; H: hydrogen; N: nitrogen; O: oxygen. For simplicity, some
carbon atoms have not been explicitly shown, but are present where there
is a junction of two lines.

 

A small molecule called hydroxyl, consisting of one oxygen atom and one
hydrogen atom, is added to the methyl group, to create
5-hydroxymethylcytosine. This reaction is carried out by enzymes called
TET1, TET2 or TET320.

This is highly relevant to the question of DNA demethylation, because
it’s the effects of DNA methylation that make this change important.
Methylation of cytosine affects gene expression because methylated
cytosine binds certain proteins, such as MeCP2. MeCP2 acts with other
proteins to repress gene expression and to recruit other repressive
modifications like histone deacetylation. When an enzyme such as TET1
adds the hydroxyl group to the methylcytosine to form the
5-hydroxymethylcytosine molecule, it changes the shape of the epigenetic
modification. If a methylated cytosine is like a grape on a tennis ball,
the 5-hydroxymethylcytosine is like a bean stuck to a grape stuck to a
tennis ball. Because of this change in shape, the MeCP2 protein can’t
bind to the modified DNA any more. The cell therefore ‘reads’
5-hydroxymethylcytosine in the same way as it reads unmethylated DNA.

Many of the techniques used until very recently looked for the presence
of DNA methylation. They often couldn’t distinguish between unmethylated
DNA and 5-hydroxymethylated DNA. This means that many of the papers
which refer to decreased DNA methylation may actually have been
detecting increased 5-hydroxymethylation without knowing it. It’s
currently unproven, but it may be that instead of actually demethylating
DNA, as reported in some of the behavioural studies, neurons really
convert 5-methylcytosine to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine. The techniques for
studying 5-hydroxymethylcytosine are still under development but we do
know that neurons contain higher levels of this chemical than any other
cell type21.

Remember, remember

 

Despite these controversies, research is continuing into the importance
of epigenetic modifications in brain function. One area that is
attracting a lot of attention is the field of memory. Memory is an
incredibly complex phenomenon. Both the hippocampus and a region of the
brain called the cortex are involved in memory, but in different ways.
The hippocampus is mainly involved in consolidating memories, as our
brains decide what we are going to remember. The hippocampus is fairly
plastic in the way that it operates, and this seems to be associated
with transient changes in DNA methylation, again through fairly
uncharacterised mechanisms. The cortex is used for longer-term storage
of memories. When memories are stored in the cortex, there are prolonged
changes in DNA methylation.

The cortex is like a hard drive on a computer with gigabytes of storage.
The hippocampus is more like the RAM (random access memory) chip, where
data are temporarily processed before being deleted, or transferred to
the hard drive for permanent storage. Our brain separates out different
functions to selected cell populations in different anatomical regions.
This is why memory loss is rarely all-encompassing. Depending on the
clinical condition, for example, either one of short-term or long-term
memory may be relatively lost or remain relatively intact. It makes a
lot of sense for these different functions to be separated in our
brains. Just try to imagine life if we remembered everything that ever
happened – the phone number that we dialled only once, every word a dull
stranger said to us on a train, or the canteen menu from a wet Wednesday
three years ago.

The complexity of our memory systems is one of the reasons why it is
quite a difficult area to study, because it can be difficult to set up
experiments where we are absolutely sure which aspects of memory our
experimental techniques are actually addressing. But one thing we know
for sure is that memory involves long-term changes in gene expression,
and in the way neurons make connections with one another. And that again
leads to the hypothesis that epigenetic mechanisms may play a role.

In mammals, both DNA methylation and histone modifications play a role
in memory and learning. Rodent studies have shown that these changes may
be targeted to very specific genes in discrete regions of the brain, as
we have come to expect. For example, the DNA methyltransferase proteins
DNMT3A and DNMT3B increase in expression in the adult rat hippocampus in
a particular learning and memory model. Conversely, treating these rats
with a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor such as 5-azacytidine blocks
memory formation and affects both the hippocampus and the cortex22.

A particular histone acetyltransferase (protein which adds acetyl groups
to histones) gene is mutated in a human disorder called Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome. Mental retardation is a frequent symptom in this disease. Mice
with a mutant version of this gene also have low levels of histone
acetylation in the hippocampus, as we would predict. They also have
major problems in long-term memory processing in the hippocampus23. When
these mice were treated with SAHA, the histone deacetylase inhibitor,
acetylation levels in the hippocampus went up, and the memory problems
improved24.

SAHA can inhibit many different histone deacetylases, but in the brain
some of its targets seem to be more important than others. The two most
highly expressed enzymes of this class are HDAC1 and HDAC2. These differ
in the ways they are expressed in the brain. HDAC1 is predominantly
expressed in neural stem cells, and in a supportive, protective
population of non-neurons called glial cells. HDAC2 is predominantly
expressed in neuronal cells25, so it’s unsurprising that this is the
histone deacetylase that is most important in learning and memory.

Mice whose neurons over-express Hdac2 have poor long-term memory, even
though their short-term memory is fine. Mice whose neurons don’t express
any Hdac2 have excellent memories. These data show us that Hdac2 has a
negative effect on memory storage. The neurons which over-expressed
Hdac2 formed far fewer connections than normal, whereas the opposite was
true for the neurons lacking Hdac2. This supports our model of
epigenetically-driven changes in gene expression ultimately altering
complex networks in the brain. SAHA improves memory in the mice that
over-express Hdac2, presumably by dampening down its effects on histone
acetylation and gene expression. SAHA also improves memory in normal
mice26.

In fact, increased acetylation levels in the brain seem to be
consistently associated with improved memory. Learning and memory both
improved in mice kept in conditions known as environmentally enriched.
This is a fancy way of saying they had access to two running wheels and
the inside of a toilet roll. The histone acetylation levels in the
hippocampus and cortex were increased in the mice in the more
entertaining surroundings. Even in these mice, the histone acetylation
levels and memory skills improved yet further if they were treated with
SAHA27.

We can see a consistent trend emerging. In various different model
systems, learning and memory improve when animals are treated with DNA
methyltransferase inhibitors, and especially with histone deacetylase
inhibitors. As we saw in the last chapter, there are drugs licensed in
both these classes, such as 5-azacytidine and SAHA, respectively. It’s
very tempting to speculate about taking these anti-cancer drugs and
using them in conditions where memory loss is a major clinical problem,
such as Alzheimer’s disease. Perhaps we might even use them as general
memory enhancers in the wider population.

Unfortunately, there are substantial difficulties in doing this. These
drugs have side-effects which can include severe fatigue, nausea and a
higher risk of infections. These side-effects are considered acceptable
if the alternative is an inevitable and fairly near-term death from
cancer. But they might be considered less acceptable for treating the
early stages of dementia, when the patient still has a relatively
reasonable quality of life. And they would certainly be unacceptable for
the general population.

There is an additional problem. Most of these drugs are really bad at
getting into the brain. In many of the rodent experiments, the drugs
were administered directly into the brain, and often into very defined
regions such as the hippocampus. This isn’t a realistic treatment method
for humans.

There are a few histone deacetylase inhibitors that do get into the
brain. A drug called sodium valproate has been used for decades to treat
epilepsy, and clearly must be getting into the brain in order to do
this. In recent years, we have realised that this compound is also a
histone deacetylase inhibitor. This would be extremely encouraging for
trying to use epigenetic drugs in Alzheimer’s disease but unfortunately,
sodium valproate only inhibits histone deacetylases very weakly. All the
animal data on learning and memory have shown that stronger inhibitors
work much better than weak ones at reversing these deficits.

It’s not just in disorders like Alzheimer’s disease that epigenetic
therapies could be useful if we manage to develop suitable drugs.
Between 5 and 10 per cent of regular users of cocaine become addicted to
the drug, suffering from uncontrollable cravings for this stimulant. A
similar phenomenon occurs in rodents, if animals are allowed unlimited
access to the drug. Addiction to stimulants such as cocaine is a classic
example of inappropriate adaptations by memory and reward circuits in
the brain. These maladaptations are regulated by long-lasting changes in
gene expression. Changes in DNA methylation, and in how methylation is
read by MeCP2, underpin this addiction. This happens via a set of poorly
understood interactions which include signalling factors, DNA and
histone modifying enzymes and readers, and miRNAs. Related pathways also
underpin addiction to amphetamines28,29.

If we return to the starting point of this chapter, it’s clear that
there’s a major need to stop children who have suffered early trauma
from developing into adults with a substantially higher than normal risk
of mental illness. It’s very appealing to think we might be able to use
epigenetic drug therapies to improve their life chances. Unfortunately,
one of the problems in designing therapies for children who have been
abused or neglected is that it’s actually pretty difficult to identify
those who will be permanently damaged as adults, and those who will have
healthy, happy and fulfilled lives. There are enormous ethical dilemmas
around giving drugs to children, when we can’t be sure if an individual
child actually needs the treatment. In addition, clinical trials to
determine if the drugs actually do any good would need to last for
decades, which makes them economically almost a non-starter for any
pharmaceutical company.

But we mustn’t end on too negative a note. Here’s a great story about an
epigenetic event and behaviour. There is a gene called Grb10 that is
involved in various signalling pathways. It’s an imprinted gene, and the
brain only expresses the paternally inherited copy. If we switch off
this paternal copy, the mouse can’t produce any Grb10 protein, and the
animals develop a very odd phenotype. They nibble off the face fur and
whiskers of other mice in the same cage. This is a sort of aggressive
grooming, a bit like a pecking order in chickens. In addition, if faced
with a big mouse that they don’t know, the Grb10 mutant mice don’t back
away – they stand their ground30.

Switching off Grb10 in the brain results in what might sound like a
rather impressive, kick-ass kind of a mouse. It maybe even seems odd
that this gene is normally switched on in the brain. Wouldn’t mice that
switched off Grb10 be the butchest, most successful mice? Actually, it’s
more likely that they’d be the mice most likely to get themselves beaten
up. There are a lot of mice in the world, and they encounter each other
pretty frequently. It pays to recognise when you are out-gunned.

When the Grb10 gene is switched off in the brain, it’s like a bad Friday
night for the mouse. Let’s put this in human terms so we can see why.
You’re down the pub when a person twice your size and all muscle knocks
against you and you spill your pint. When this gene is switched off,
it’s as if you have a friend next to you who says, ‘Go on, you can take
him/her, don’t wimp out.’ We all know how badly those scenarios tend to
play out. So let’s end this chapter by raising a cheer for imprinted
Grb10, the gene that likes to say, ‘Leave it mate, it’s not worth it.’

  Chapter 13

 

  The Downhill Slope

 

  I guess I don’t so much mind being old, as I mind being fat and old.

  Benjamin Franklin

 

Time moves forward, we age. It’s inevitable. And as we get older, our
bodies change. Once we’re past our mid-thirties most of us would agree
that it gets harder and harder to sustain the same level of physical
performance. It doesn’t matter if it’s how fast we can run, how far we
can cycle before needing to stop for a break, or how quickly we recover
from a big night out. The older we get, the harder everything seems to
become. We develop new aches and pains, and succumb more easily to
annoying little infections.

Ageing is something we are good at recognising in the people around us.
Even quite small children can tell the difference between the young and
the very old, even if they are a bit hazy on everyone in the middle.
Adults can easily tell the difference between a 20-year-old and a
40-something individual, or between two people who are 40 and 65.

We can categorise individuals instinctively into approximate age groups
not because they give off an intrinsic radio signal about the number of
years they have been on earth, but because of the physical signs of
ageing. These include the loss of fat beneath the skin, making our
features more drawn and less ‘fresh-faced’. There are the wrinkles, the
fall in muscle tone, that slight curvature to the spine.

The growth of the cosmetic surgery industry appears to be relentless and
shows how desperate we can be to fight the symptoms of ageing. Figures
released in 2010 showed that in the top 25 countries covered in a survey
by the International Society of Aesthetic Plastic Surgery, there were
over eight and a half million surgical procedures carried out in 2009,
and about the same number of non-surgical procedures, such as Botox and
dermo-abrasion. The United States topped the list, with Brazil and China
fighting for second place1.

As a society, we don’t seem to mind really about the number of years
we’ve been alive, but we dislike intensely the physical decline that
accompanies them. It’s not just the trivial stuff either. One of the
greatest risk factors for developing cancer is simply being old. The
same is true for conditions such as Alzheimer’s disease and stroke.

Most breakthroughs in human healthcare up until now have improved both
longevity and quality of life. That’s partly because many major advances
targeted early childhood deaths. Vaccination against serious diseases
such as polio, for example, has hugely improved both childhood mortality
figures (fewer children dying) and morbidity in terms of quality of life
for survivors (fewer children permanently disabled as a result of
polio).

There is a growing debate around the issue sometimes known as human life
extension, which deals with extending the far end of life, old age.
Human life extension refers to the concept that we can use interventions
so that individuals will live to a greater age. But this takes us into
difficult territory, both socially and scientifically. To understand
why, it’s important to establish what ageing really is, and why it is so
much more than just being alive for a long time.

One useful definition of ageing is ‘the progressive functional decline
of tissue function that eventually results in mortality’2. It’s this
functional decline that is the most depressing aspect of ageing for most
people, rather than the final destination.

Generally speaking, most of us recognise the importance of this quality
of life issue. For example, in a survey of 605 Australian adults in
2010, about half said they would not take an anti-ageing pill if one
were developed. The rationale behind their choice was based around
quality of life. These respondents didn’t believe such a pill would
prolong healthy life. Simply living for longer wasn’t attractive, if
this was associated with increasing ill-health and disability. These
respondents did not wish to prolong their own lives, unless this was
associated with improved health in later years3.

There are thus two separate aspects to any scientific discussion of
ageing. These are lifespan itself, and the control of late-onset
disorders associated with ageing. What isn’t clear is the degree to
which it is possible or reasonable to separate the two, at least in
humans.

Epigenetics definitely has a role to play in ageing. It’s not the only
factor that’s important, but it is significant. This field of
epigenetics and ageing has also led to one of the most acrimonious
disputes in the pharmaceutical sector in recent years, as we’ll see
towards the end of this chapter.

We have to ask why our cells malfunction as we get older, leaving us
more at risk of illnesses that include cancer, type 2 diabetes,
cardiovascular disease and dementia, amongst a host of other conditions.
One reason is because the DNA script in the cells of our body begins to
change for the worse. It accumulates random alterations in sequence.
These are somatic mutations, which affect the tissue cells of the body,
but not the germline. Many cancers have changes in the DNA sequence,
often caused by quite large rearrangements between chromosomes, where
genetic material is swapped from one chromosome to another.

Guilt by association

 

But as we’ve seen, our cells contain multiple mechanisms for keeping the
DNA blueprint as intact as possible. Wherever possible, a cell’s default
setting is to maintain the genome in its original state, as much as it
can. But the epigenome is different. By its very nature, this is more
flexible and plastic than the genome. Because of this, it is probably
not surprising that epigenetic modifications change as animals age. The
epigenome may eventually turn out to be far more prone to changes with
age than the genome, because the epigenome is more naturally variable
than the genome anyway.

We met some examples of this in Chapter 5, where we discussed how
genetically identical twins become less identical epigenetically as they
age. The issue of how the epigenome changes as we age has been examined
even more directly. Researchers studied two large groups of people from
Iceland and from Utah, who have been part of on-going long-term
population studies. DNA was prepared from blood samples that had been
taken from these people between eleven and sixteen years apart. Blood
contains red and white blood cells. The red blood cells carry oxygen
around the body, and are essentially just little bags of haemoglobin.
The white blood cells are the cells that generate immune responses to
infections. These cells retain their nuclei and contain DNA.

The researchers found that the overall DNA methylation levels in the
white blood cells of some of these individuals changed over time. The
change wasn’t always the same. In some individuals, the DNA methylation
levels went up with age, in others they dropped. The direction of change
seemed to run in families. This may mean that the age-related change in
DNA methylation was genetically influenced, or affected by shared
environmental factors in a family. The scientists also looked in detail
at methylation at over 1,500 specific CpG sites in the genome. These
sites were mainly associated with protein-coding genes. They found the
same trends at these specific sites as they had seen when looking at
overall DNA methylation levels. In some individuals, site-specific DNA
methylation was increased whereas in others it fell. DNA methylation
levels were increased or decreased by at least 20 per cent in around one
tenth of the people in the study.

The authors stated in their conclusion that ‘these data support the idea
of age-related loss of normal epigenetic patterns as a mechanism for
late onset of common human diseases’4. It’s true that the data are
consistent with this model of epigenetic mechanisms leading to late
onset disease, but there are limitations, which we should bear in mind.

In particular, these types of studies highlight important correlations
between epigenetic change and diseases of old age, but they don’t prove
that one event causes the other. Deaths through drowning are most common
when sales of suntan lotion are highest. From this one could infer that
sun tan lotions have some effect on people that makes them more likely
to drown. The reality of course is that sales of suntan lotion rise
during hot weather, which is also when people are most likely to go
swimming. The more people who swim, the greater the number who will
drown, on average. There is a correlation between the two factors we
have monitored (sales of sun block and deaths by drowning) but this
isn’t because one factor causes the other.

So, although we know that epigenetic modifications change over time,
this doesn’t prove that these alterations cause the illnesses and
degeneration associated with old age. In theory, the changes could just
be random variations with no functional consequences. They could just be
changes in the epigenetic background noise in a cell. In many cases, we
don’t even yet know whether the altered patterns of epigenetic
modifications lead to changes in gene expression. Addressing this
question is hugely challenging, and particularly difficult to assess in
human populations.

Guilt by more than association

 

Having said that, there are some epigenetic modifications that are
definitely involved in disease initiation or progression. The case for
these is strongest in cancer, as we saw in Chapter 11. The evidence
includes the epigenetic drugs which can treat certain specific types of
cancer. It also includes the substantial amounts of data from
experimental systems. These show that altering epigenetic regulation in
a cell increases the likelihood of a cell becoming cancerous, or can
make an already cancerous cell more aggressive.

One of the areas that we dealt with in Chapter 11 was the increase in
DNA methylation that frequently occurs at the promoters of tumour
suppressor genes. This increased DNA methylation switches off the
expression of the tumour suppressor genes. Oddly enough, this increase
in DNA methylation at specific sites is often found against an overall
background of decreased DNA methylation in many other areas of the
genome in the same cancer cell. This decrease in methylation may be
caused by a fall in expression or activity of the maintenance DNA
methyltransferase, DNMT1. This decrease in global DNA methylation may
also contribute to the development of cancer.

To investigate this, Rudi Jaenisch generated mice which only expressed
Dnmt1 protein at about 10 per cent of normal levels in their cells. The
levels of DNA methylation in their cells were very low compared with
normal mice. In addition to being quite stunted at birth, these Dnmt1
mutant mice developed aggressive tumours of the immune system (T cell
lymphomas) when they were between four and eight months of age. This was
associated with rearrangements of certain chromosomes, and especially
with an extra copy of chromosome 15 in the cancer cells.

Professor Jaenisch speculated that the low levels of DNA methylation
made the chromosomes very unstable and prone to breakages. This put the
chromosomes at high risk of joining up in inappropriate ways. It’s like
snapping a pink stick of rock and a green stick of rock to create four
pieces in total. You can join them back together again using melted
sugar, to create two full-length items of tooth-rotting confectionery.
But if you do this in the dark, you may find that sometimes you have
created ‘hybrid’ rock sticks, where one part is pink and the other is
green.

The end result of increased chromosome instability in Rudi Jaensich’s
mice was abnormal gene expression. This in turn led to too much
proliferation of highly invasive and aggressive cells, resulting in
cancer5,6. These data are one of the reasons why DNMT inhibitors are
unlikely to be used as drugs in anything other than cancer. The fear is
that the drugs would cause decreased DNA methylation in normal cells,
which might pre-dispose some cell types towards cancer.

These data suggest that the DNA methylation level per se is not the
critical issue. What matters is where the changes in DNA methylation
take place in the genome.

The generalised decrease in DNA methylation levels that comes with age
has also been reported in other species than humans and mice, ranging
from rats to humpback salmon7. It’s not entirely clear why low levels of
DNA methylation are associated with instability of the genome. It may be
because high levels of DNA methylation can lead to a very compacted DNA
structure, which may be more structurally stable. After all, it’s easy
to snip through a single extended wire with a pair of cutters, but much
harder if that wire has been squashed down into a dense knot of metal.

It’s important to appreciate just how much effort cells put into looking
after their chromosomes. If a chromosome breaks, the cell will repair
the break if it can. If it can’t, the cell may trigger an auto-destruct
mechanism, essentially committing cellular suicide. That’s because
damaged chromosomes can be dangerous. It’s better to kill one cell, than
for it to survive with damaged genetic material. For instance, imagine
one copy of chromosome 9 and one copy of chromosome 22 break in the same
cell. They could get repaired properly, but sometimes the repair goes
wrong and part of chromosome 9 joins up with part of chromosome 22.

This rearrangement of chromosomes 9 and 22 actually happens relatively
frequently in cells of the immune system. In fact it happens so often
that this 9:22 hybrid has a specific name. It’s called the Philadelphia
chromosome, after the city where it was first described. Ninety-five per
cent of people who have a form of cancer called chronic myeloid
leukaemia have the Philadelphia chromosome in their cancer cells. This
abnormal chromosome causes this cancer in the cells of the immune system
because of where the breaking and rejoining happen in the genome. The
fusion of the two chromosome regions results in the creation of a hybrid
gene called Bcr-Abl. The protein encoded by this hybrid gene drives cell
proliferation forwards very aggressively.

Our cells have therefore developed very sophisticated and fast-acting
pathways to repair chromosome breaks as rapidly as possible, in order to
prevent these sorts of fusions. To do this, our cells must be able to
recognise loose ends of DNA. These are created when a chromosome breaks
in two.

But there’s a problem. Every chromosome in our cell quite naturally has
two loose ends of DNA, one at each end. Something must stop the DNA
repair machinery from thinking these ends need to be repaired. That
something is a specialised structure called the telomere. There is a
telomere at each end of every chromosome, making a total of 92 telomeres
per cell in humans. They stop the DNA repair machinery from targeting
the ends of chromosomes.

The tail ends

 

Telomeres play a critical role in control of ageing. The more a cell
divides, the smaller its telomeres become. Essentially, as we age, the
telomeres get shorter. Eventually, they get so small that they don’t
function properly anymore. The cells stop dividing and may even activate
their self-destruct mechanisms. The only cells where this is different
are the germ cells that ultimately give rise to eggs or sperm. In these
cells the telomeres always stay long, so the next generation isn’t
short-changed when it comes to longevity. In 2009, the Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine was awarded to Elizabeth Blackburn, Carol Greider
and Jack Szostak for their work showing how telomeres function.

Since telomeres are so important in ageing, it makes sense to consider
how they interact with the epigenetic system. The DNA of vertebrate
telomeres consists of hundreds of repeats of the sequence TTAGGG. There
are no genes at the telomere. We can also see from the sequence that
there are no CpG motifs at the telomeres, so there can’t be any DNA
methylation. If there are any epigenetic effects that make a difference
at the telomeres they will therefore have to be based on histone
modifications.

In between the telomeres and the main parts of the chromosome are
stretches of DNA referred to as sub-telomeric regions. These contain
lots of runs of repetitive DNA. These repeats are less restricted in
sequence than the telomeres. The sub-telomeric regions contain a low
frequency of genes. They contain some CpG motifs so these regions can be
modified by DNA methylation, in addition to histone modifications.

The types of epigenetic modifications normally found at telomeres and
the sub-telomeric regions are the ones that are highly repressive.
Because there are so few genes in these regions anyway, these
modifications probably aren’t used to switch off individual genes.
Instead, these repressive epigenetic modifications are probably involved
in ‘squashing down’ the ends of the chromosomes. The epigenetic
modifications attract proteins that coat the ends of the chromosomes,
and help them to stay as tightly coiled up, and as dense and
inaccessible as possible. It’s a little like covering the ends of a pipe
in insulation.

It’s potentially a problem for a cell that all its telomeres have the
same DNA sequence, because identical sequences in a nucleus tend to find
and bind to one another. Such close proximity creates a big risk that
the ends of different chromosomes will link up, especially if they get
damaged and opened up. This can lead to all sorts of errors as the cell
struggles to sort out chains of chromosomes, and may result in
‘mixed-up’ chromosomes similar to the one that causes chronic myeloid
leukaemia. By coating the telomeres with repressive modifications that
make the ends of the chromosomes really densely packed, there’s less
chance that different chromosomes will join up inappropriately.

The cell is, however, stuck with a dilemma, as shown in Figure 13.1.

[Fig-36.eps]

 

Figure 13.1 Both abnormal shortening and lengthening of telomeres have
potentially deleterious consequences for cells.

 

If the telomeres get too short, the cell tends to shut down. But if the
telomeres get too long, there’s an increased risk of different
chromosomes linking up, and creating new cancer-promoting genes. Cell
shut-down is probably a defence mechanism that has evolved to minimise
the risk of creating new cancer-inducing genes. This is one of the
reasons why it’s likely to be very difficult to create drugs that
increase longevity without increasing the risk of cancer as well.

What happens when we create new pluripotent cells? This could be through
somatic cell nuclear transfer, as we saw in Chapter 1, or through
creation of iPS cells, as we saw in Chapter 2. We may use these
techniques to create cloned non-human animals, or human stem cells to
treat degenerative diseases. In both cases, we want to create cells with
normal longevity. After all, there is little point creating a new prize
stallion, or cells to implant into the pancreas of a teenager with
diabetes, if the horse or the cells die of telomere ‘old age’ within a
short time.

That means we need to create cells with telomeres that are about the
same length as the ones in normal embryos. In nature, this occurs
because the chromosomes in the germline are protected from telomere
shortening. But if we are generating pluripotent cells from relatively
adult cells, we are dealing with nuclei where the telomeres are already
likely to be relatively short, because the ‘starter’ cells were taken
from adults, whose chromosomes are getting shorter with age.

Luckily, something unusual happens when we create pluripotent cells
experimentally. When iPS cells are created, they switch on expression of
a gene called telomerase. Telomerase normally keeps telomeres at a
healthy long length. However, as we get older, the telomerase activity
in our cells starts to drop. It’s important to switch on telomerase in
iPS cells, or the cells would have very short telomeres and wouldn’t
create very many generations of daughter cells. The Yamanaka factors
induce the expression of high levels of telomerase in iPS cells.

But we can’t use telomerase to try to reverse or slow human ageing. Even
if we could introduce this enzyme into cells, perhaps by using gene
therapy, the chances of inducing cancers would be too great. The
telomere system is finely balanced, and so is the trade-off between
ageing and cancer.

Both histone deacetylase inhibitors and DNA methyltransferase inhibitors
improve the efficiency of the Yamanaka factors. This might be partly
because these compounds help to remove some of the repressive
modifications at the telomeres and sub-telomeric regions. This may make
it easier for telomerase to build up the telomeres as the cells are
reprogrammed.

The interaction of epigenetic modifications with the telomere system
takes us a little further away from a simple correlation between
epigenetics and ageing. It moves us closer to a model where we can start
to develop confidence that epigenetic mechanisms may actually play a
causative role in at least some aspects of ageing.

Is your beer getting old?

 

To investigate this more fully, scientists have made extensive use of an
organism we all encounter every day of our lives, whenever we eat a
slice of bread or drink a bottle of beer. The scientific term for this
model organism is Saccharomyces cerevisiae, but we generally know it by
its more common name of brewer’s yeast. We’ll stick with yeast, for
short.

Although yeast is a simple one-celled organism, it is actually very like
us in some really fundamental ways. It has a nucleus in its cells
(bacteria don’t have this) and contains many of the same proteins and
biochemical pathways as higher organisms such as mammals.

Because yeast are such simple organisms, they’re very easy to work with
experimentally. A yeast cell (mother) can generate new cells (daughters)
in a relatively straightforward way. The mother cell copies its DNA. A
new cell buds off from the side of the mother cell. This daughter cell
contains the correct amount of DNA, and drifts off to act as a
completely independent new single-celled organism. Yeast divide to form
new cells really quickly, meaning experiments can be run in a few weeks
rather than taking the months or years that are required for some higher
organisms, and especially mammals. Yeast can be grown either in a liquid
soup, or plated out onto a Petri dish, making them very easy to handle.
It’s also fairly straightforward to create mutations in interesting
genes.

Yeast have a specific feature that has made them one of the favourite
model systems of epigeneticists. Yeast never methylate their DNA, so all
epigenetic effects must be caused by histone modifications. There’s also
another helpful feature of yeast. Each time a yeast mother cell gives
rise to a daughter cell, the bud leaves a scar on the mother. This makes
it really easy to work out how many times a cell has divided. There are
two types of ageing in yeast and these each have parallels to human
ageing, as shown in Figure 13.2.

[Fig-37.eps]

 

Figure 13.2 The two models of ageing in yeast, relevant for dividing and
non-dividing cells.

 

Most of the emphasis in ageing research has been on replicative ageing,
and trying to understand why cells lose their ability to divide.
Replicative ageing in mammals is clearly related to some obvious
symptoms of getting older. For example, skeletal muscle contains
specialised stem cells called satellite cells. These can only divide a
certain number of times. Once they are exhausted, you can’t create new
muscle fibres.

Substantial progress has been made in understanding replicative ageing
in yeast. One of the key enzymes in controlling this process is called
Sir2 and it’s an epigenetic protein. It affects replicative ageing in
yeast through two pathways. One seems to be specific to yeast, but the
other is found in numerous species right through the evolutionary tree,
all the way up to humans.

Sir2 is a histone deacetylase. Mutant yeast that over-express Sir2 have
a replicative lifespan that is at least 30 per cent longer than normal8.
Conversely, yeast that don’t express Sir2 have a reduced lifespan9,
about 50 per cent shorter than usual. In 2009, Professor Shelley Berger,
an incredibly dynamic scientist at the University of Pennsylvania whose
group has been very influential in molecular epigenetics, published the
results of a really elegant set of genetic and molecular experiments in
yeast.

Her research showed that the Sir2 protein influences ageing by taking
acetyl groups off histone proteins, and not through any other roles this
enzyme might carry out10. This was a key experiment, because Sir2, like
many histone deacetylases, has rather loose molecular morals. It doesn’t
just remove acetyl groups from histone proteins. Sir2 will take acetyl
groups away from at least 60 other proteins in the cell. Many of these
proteins have nothing to do with chromatin or with gene expression.
Shelley Berger’s work was crucial for demonstrating that Sir2 influences
ageing precisely because of its effects on histone proteins. The altered
epigenetic pattern on the histones in turn influenced gene expression.

These data, showing that epigenetic modifications of histones really do
have a major influence on ageing, gave scientists in this field a big
confidence boost that they were on the right track. The importance of
Sir2 doesn’t seem to be restricted to yeast. If we over-express Sir2 in
our favourite worm, C. elegans11, the worm lives longer. Fruit flies
that over-expressed Sir2 had up to a 57 per cent increase in lifespan12.
So, could this gene also be important in human ageing?

There are seven versions of the Sir2 gene in mammals, called SIRT1
through to SIRT7. Much of the attention in the human field has focused
on SIRT6, an unusual histone deacetylase. The breakthroughs in this
field have come from the laboratory of Katrin Chua, a young Assistant
Professor at the Stanford Center on Longevity (and also the sister of
Amy Chua who wrote the highly controversial mothering memoir Battle Hymn
of the Tiger Mother).

Katrin Chua created mice which never expressed any Sirt6 protein, even
during their development (they are known as Sirt6 knockout mice). These
animals seemed normal at birth, although they were rather small. But
from two weeks of age onwards they developed a whole range of conditions
that mimicked the ageing process. These included loss of fat under the
skin, spinal curvature, and metabolism deficits. The mice died by one
month of age, whereas a normal mouse can live for up to two years under
laboratory conditions.

Most histone deacetylases are very promiscuous. By this we mean they
will deacetylate any acetylated histone they can find. Indeed, as
mentioned above, many don’t even restrict themselves to histones, and
will take acetyl groups off all sorts of proteins. However, SIRT6 isn’t
like this. It only takes the acetyl groups off two specific amino acids
– lysine 9 and lysine 56, both on histone H3. The enzyme also seems to
have a preference for histones that are positioned at telomeres. When
Katrin Chua knocked out the SIRT6 gene in human cells, she found that
the telomeres of these cells got damaged, and the chromosomes began to
join up. The cells lost the ability to divide any further and pretty
much shut down most of their activities13.

This suggested that human cells need SIRT6 so that they can maintain the
healthy structures of telomeres. But this wasn’t the only role of the
SIRT6 protein. Acetylation of histone 3 at amino acid 9 is associated
with gene expression. When SIRT6 removes this modification, this amino
acid can be methylated by other enzymes present in the cell. Methylation
at this position on the histone is associated with gene repression.
Katrin Chua performed further experiments which confirmed that changing
the expression levels of SIRT6 changed the expression of specific genes.

SIRT6 is targeted to specific genes by forming a complex with a
particular protein. Once it’s present at those genes, SIRT6 takes part
in a feedback loop that keeps driving down expression of the gene, in a
classic vicious cycle. When the SIRT6 gene is knocked out, the levels of
histone acetylation at these genes stays high because the feedback loop
can’t be switched on. This drives up expression of these target genes in
the SIRT6 knockout mice. The target genes are ones which promote
auto-destruction, or the cell’s entry into a state of permanent stasis
known as senescence. This effect explains why SIRT6 knockdown is
associated with premature ageing14. It’s because genes that accelerate
processes associated with ageing are switched on too soon, or too
vigorously, at a young age.

It’s a little like a crafty manufacturer installing an inbuilt
obsolescence mechanism into a product. Normally, the mechanism doesn’t
kick in for a certain number of years, because if the obsolescence
activates too early, the manufacturer will get a reputation for
prematurely shoddy goods and nobody will buy them at all. Knocking out
SIRT6 in cells is a little like a software glitch that activates the
inbuilt obsolescence pathway after, say, one month instead of two years.

Other SIRT6 target genes are associated with provoking inflammatory and
immune responses. This is also relevant to ageing, because some
conditions that become much more common as we age are a result of
increased activation of these pathways. These include certain aspects of
cardiovascular disease and chronic conditions such as rheumatoid
arthritis.

There is a rare genetic disease called Werner’s syndrome. Patients with
this disorder age faster and at an earlier age than healthy individuals.
The condition is caused by mutations in a gene that is involved in the
three-dimensional structure of DNA, keeping it in the correct
conformation and wound up to the right degree of tightness for a
specific cell type15. The normal protein binds to telomeres. It binds
most effectively when the histones at the telomeres have lost the acetyl
group at amino acid 9 on histone H3. This is the precise modification
removed by the SIRT6 enzyme. This further strengthens the case for a
role of SIRT6 in control of ageing16.

Given that SIRT6 is a histone deacetylase, it might be interesting to
test the effect of a histone deacetylase inhibitor on ageing. We would
predict that it would have the same effects as knocking down expression
of the SIRT6 enzyme, i.e. it would accelerate ageing. This might give us
pause for thought when we plan to treat patients with histone
deacetylase inhibitors such as SAHA. After all, an anti-cancer drug that
makes you age faster isn’t that attractive an idea.

Fortunately, from the point of view of treating cancer patients, SIRT6
belongs to a special class of histone deacetylase enzymes called
sirtuins. Unlike the enzymes we met in Chapter 11, the sirtuins aren’t
affected by SAHA or any of the other histone deacetylase inhibitor
drugs.

Eat less, live longer

 

All of this begs the question of whether we are any closer to finding a
pill we can offer to people to increase longevity. The data so far don’t
seem promising, especially if it’s true that many of the mechanisms that
underlie ageing are defences against developing cancer. There’s not a
lot of point creating therapies that could allow us to live for another
50 years, if they also lead to tumours that could kill us in five. But
there is one way of increasing lifespan that has proven astonishingly
effective, from yeast to fruit flies, from worms to mammals. This is
calorie restriction.

If you only give rodents about 60 per cent of the calories they would
eat if given free access to food, there is a dramatic impact on
longevity and development of age-related diseases17. The restricted
calorie intake must start early in life and be continued throughout life
to see this effect. In yeast, decreasing the amount of glucose (fuel) in
the culture from 2 per cent to 0.5 per cent extended the lifespan by
around 30 per cent18.

There’s been a lot of debate on whether or not this calorie-restriction
effect is mediated via sirtuins, such as Sir2 in yeast, or the versions
of Sir2 in other animals. Sir2 is regulated in part by a key chemical,
whose levels are affected by the amount of nutrition available to cells.
That’s the reason why some authors have suggested that the two might be
connected, and it’s an attractive hypothesis. There’s no debate that
Sir2 is definitely important for longevity. Calorie restriction is also
clearly very important. The question is whether the two work together or
separately. There’s no consensus as yet on this, and the experimental
findings are very influenced by the model system used. This can come
down to details that at first glance might almost seem trivial, such as
which strain of brewer’s yeast is used, or exactly how much glucose is
in the culture liquid.

The question of how calorie restriction works might seem much less
important than the fact that it does. But the mechanism matters
enormously if we’re looking for an anti-ageing strategy, because calorie
restriction has severe limitations for humans. Food has enormous social
and cultural aspects, it’s rarely just fuel for us. In addition to these
psychological and sociological issues, calorie restriction has side
effects. The most obvious ones are muscle wasting and loss of libido.
It’s not much of a surprise that when offered the chances of living
longer, but with these side-effects, the majority of people find the
prospect unattractive19.

That’s one of the reasons that a 2006 paper in Nature, led by David
Sinclair at Harvard Medical School, created such a furore. The
scientists studied the effects of a compound called resveratrol on
health and survival in mice. Resveratrol is a complex compound
synthesised by plants, including grapes. It is a constituent of red
wine. At the time of the paper, resveratrol had already been shown to
extend lifespan in yeast, C. elegans and fruit flies20,21.

Professor Sinclair and his colleagues raised mice on very high calorie
diets, and treated the mice with resveratrol for six months. At the end
of this six-month period, they examined all sorts of health outcomes in
the mice. All the mice which had been on the high calorie diets were
fat, regardless of whether or not they had been treated with
resveratrol. But the mice treated with resveratrol were healthier than
the untreated fat mice. Their livers were less fatty, their motor skills
were better, they had fewer diabetes symptoms. By the age of 114 weeks,
the resveratrol-treated mice had a 31 per cent lower death rate than the
untreated animals fed the same diet22.

We can see immediately why this paper garnered so much attention. If the
same effects could be achieved in humans, resveratrol would be a
get-out-of-obesity-free card. Eat as much as you like, get as fat as you
want and yet still have a long and healthy life. No leaving behind
one-third of every meal and losing your muscles and your libido.

How was resveratrol doing this? A previous paper from the same group
showed that resveratrol activated a sirtuin protein, in this case
Sirt123. Sirt1 is believed to be important for the control of sugar and
fat metabolism.

Professor Sinclair set up a company called Sirtris Pharmaceuticals,
which continued to make new compounds based around the structure of
resveratrol. In 2008 GlaxoSmithKline paid $720 million for Sirtris
Pharmaceuticals to gain access to its expertise and portfolio of
compounds for treating diseases of ageing.

This deal was considered expensive by many industry observers, and it
hasn’t been without its problems. In 2009, a group from rival
pharmaceutical company Amgen published a paper. They claimed that
resveratrol did not activate Sirt1, and that the original findings
represented an artefact caused by technical problems24. Shortly
afterwards, scientists from Pfizer, another pharmaceutical giant,
published very similar findings to Amgen25.

It’s actually very unusual for large pharmaceutical companies to publish
work that simply contradicts another company’s findings. There’s nothing
much to be gained by doing so. Pharmaceutical companies are ultimately
judged by the drugs they manage to launch successfully, and criticising
a competitor in the early stages of a drug discovery programme gives
them no commercial advantage. The fact that both Amgen and Pfizer went
public with their findings is a demonstration of how controversial the
resveratrol story had become.

Does it matter how resveratrol works? Isn’t the most important feature
the fact that it has such dramatic effects? If you are trying to develop
new drugs to treat human conditions, it unfortunately matters quite a
lot. The authorities who license new drugs are much keener on compounds
when they know how they work. This is partly because this makes it much
easier to monitor for side-effects, as you can develop better theories
about what to look out for. But the other issue is that resveratrol
itself probably isn’t the ideal compound to use as a drug.

This is often an issue with natural products such as resveratrol, which
was isolated from plants. The natural compounds may need to be altered
to a greater or lesser extent, so that they circulate well in the body,
and don’t have unwanted side effects. For example, artemisinin is a
chemical derived from wormwood which can kill malarial parasites.
Artemisinin itself isn’t taken up well by the human body so researchers
developed compounds that were variants of the chemical structure of the
original natural product. These variants kill malarial parasites, but
are also much better than artemisinin at getting taken up by our
bodies26.

But if we don’t know exactly how a particular compound is working, it’s
very hard to design and test new ones, because we don’t know how to
easily check if the new compounds are still affecting the right protein.

GlaxoSmithKline is standing by its sirtuin programmes, but in a worrying
development for the company they have stopped a clinical trial of a
special formulation of resveratrol in a disease called multiple myeloma,
because of problems with kidney toxicity27.

The progress of sirtuin histone deacetylase activators is of keen
interest to all the big players in the pharmaceutical industry. We don’t
know yet if these epigenetic modifiers will set the agenda, or sound the
death knell, for development of therapies specifically aimed at
increasing longevity or combatting old age. So, for now, we’re still
stuck with our old routine: lots of vegetables, plenty of exercise and
try to avoid harsh overhead lighting – it does nobody any favours.

  Chapter 14

 

  Long Live the Queen

 

  All my possessions for a moment of time.

  Attributed to Queen Elizabeth I

 

The effects of nutrition on the health and lifespan of mammals are
pretty dramatic. As we saw in the previous chapter, prolonged calorie
restriction can extend lifespan by as much as one-third in mice1. We
also saw in Chapter 6 that our own health and longevity can be affected
by the ways our parents and grandparents ate. These are quite startling
findings but nature has provided us with a much more dramatic example of
the impact of nutrition on lifespan. Imagine, if you can, a dietary
regime that means a select few in a species have a lifespan that is
twenty times longer than that of most of their companions. Twenty times
longer. If that happened in humans, the UK might still be in the reign
of Queen Elizabeth I, and would expect to be so for about another 400
years.

Obviously this doesn’t happen in humans, but it does happen in one
common organism. It’s a creature that we all meet every spring and
summer. We use the results of its labour to make candles and furniture
polish, and we have eaten its hard-earned bounty since the very
beginning of human history. It’s the honeybee.

The honeybee, Apis mellifera, is a truly extraordinary creature. It is a
prime example of a social insect. It lives in colonies that can contain
tens of thousands of individuals. The vast majority of these are
workers. These are sterile females, which have a range of specialised
roles including gathering pollen, building living quarters and looking
after the young. There are a small number of males, who do very little
except mate, if they are lucky. And there is a queen.

In the formation of a new colony, a virgin queen leaves a hive,
accompanied by a swarm of workers. She’ll mate with some males and then
settle down to form a new colony. The queen will lay thousands of eggs,
most of which will hatch and develop into more workers. A few eggs will
hatch and develop into new queens, who can start the whole cycle all
over again.

Because the queen who founded the colony mated several times, not all
the bees in the colony will be genetically identical to each other,
because some of them will have different fathers. But there will be
groups of thousands and thousands of genetically identical bees in any
colony. This genetic identity doesn’t refer only to the worker bees. The
new queens are genetically identical to thousands of worker bees in the
colony. We could call them sisters, but this doesn’t really describe
them well enough. They are all clones.

However, a new queen and her clonal worker sisters are clearly
incredibly different from each other, both in physical form and in
activities. The queen can be twice the size of a worker bee. After the
so-called nuptial flight, when she first leaves a colony and mates, the
queen almost never leaves the hive again. She stays in the darkness of
the interior, laying up to 2,000 eggs a day in the summer months. She
has no sting barbs, no wax glands and no pollen baskets (not much point
having a shopping bag if you never leave the house). Worker bees have a
lifespan that can usually be measured in weeks, whereas queens live for
years2.

Conversely, workers can do many things that the queens can’t. Chief
amongst these is collecting food, and then telling the rest of the
colony its location. This information is communicated using the famous
‘waggle dance’. The queen lives in darkened luxury, but she never gets
to boogie.

So, a honeybee colony contains thousands of individuals who are
genetically identical, but a few of them are really different physically
and behaviourally. This difference in outcome is all down to how the bee
larvae are fed. The pattern of early feeding completely determines
whether a larva will develop into a worker or into a queen.

For honeybees the DNA script is constant but the outcome is variable.
The outcome is controlled by an early event (feeding pattern) which sets
a phenotype that is maintained throughout the rest of life. This is a
scenario that just shrieks epigenetics at us, and in the last few years
scientists have started to unravel the molecular events that underpin
this process.

The critical roll of the dice for honeybees happens after the third day
of life, as a fairly immobile grub or larva. Until day three, all
honeybee larvae are given the same food. This is a substance called
royal jelly, which is produced by a specialised group of workers. These
young workers are known as nurse bees and they secrete royal jelly from
glands in their heads. Royal jelly is a highly nutritious food source.
It is a concentrated mix of a lot of different components, including key
amino acids, unusual fats, specific proteins, vitamins and other
nutrients that haven’t been well-characterised yet.

Once the larvae are three days old, the nurse bees stop feeding royal
jelly to most of them. Instead, most larvae are switched onto a diet of
pollen and nectar. These are the larvae which will grow up to be worker
bees.

But for reasons that nobody really understands, the nurse bees continue
feeding royal jelly to a select few larvae. We don’t know how these
larvae are chosen or why. Genetically they are identical to the ones
that are switched onto the less sophisticated diet. But this small group
of larvae that continue to be nourished with royal jelly grow up to be
queens, and they’re fed this same substance throughout their lives. The
royal jelly is essential for the production of mature ovaries in the
queens. Worker females never develop proper ovaries, which is one of the
reasons they are infertile. Royal jelly also prevents the queen from
developing the organs that she won’t ever need, like those pollen
baskets.

We understand some of the mechanisms behind this process. Bee larvae
contain an organ that has some of the same functions as our liver. When
a larva receives royal jelly continuously, this organ processes the
complex food source and activates the insulin pathway. This is very
similar to the hormonal pathway in mammals that controls the levels of
sugar in the bloodstream. In honeybees activation of this pathway
increases production of another hormone, called Juvenile Hormone.
Juvenile Hormone in turn activates other pathways. Some of these
stimulate growth and development of tissues like the maturing ovaries.
Others shut down production of the organs that the queen doesn’t need3.

Mimicking royalty

 

Because honeybee maturation has so many hallmarks of an epigenetic
phenomenon, researchers speculated that there would also be an
involvement of the epigenetic machinery. The first indications that this
is indeed the case came in 2006. This was the year when researchers
sequenced the genome of this species, to identify the fundamental
genetic blueprint4. Their research showed that the honeybee genome
contained genes that looked very similar to the DNA methyltransferase
genes of higher organisms such as vertebrates. The honeybee genome was
also shown to contain a lot of CpG motifs. This is the two-nucleotide
sequence that is usually the target for DNA methyltransferases.

In the same year, a group led by Gene Robinson in Illinois showed that
the predicted DNA methyltransferase proteins encoded in the honeybee
genome were active. The proteins were able to add methyl groups to the
cytosine residue in a CpG motif in DNA5. Honeybees also expressed
proteins that were able to bind to methylated DNA. Together, these data
showed that honeybee cells could both ‘write’ and ‘read’ an epigenetic
code.

Until these data were published, nobody had really wanted to take a
guess as to whether or not honeybees would possess a DNA methylation
system. This was because the most widely used experimental system in
insects, the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, whom we met earlier in
this book, doesn’t methylate its DNA.

It’s interesting to discover that honeybees have an intact DNA
methylation system. But this doesn’t prove that DNA methylation is
involved in the responses to royal jelly, or the persistent effects of
this foodstuff on the physical form and behaviour of mature bees. This
issue was addressed by some elegant work from the laboratory of Dr
Ryszard Maleszka at the Australian National University in Canberra.

Dr Maleszka and his colleagues knocked down the expression of one of the
DNA methyltransferases in honeybee larvae, by switching off the Dnmt3
gene. Dnmt3 is responsible for adding methyl groups to regions of DNA
that haven’t been methylated before. The results of this experiment are
shown in Figure 14.1.

[Fig-38.eps]

 

Figure 14.1 When royal jelly is fed to honeybee larvae for extended
periods, the larvae develop into queens. The same effect is seen in the
absence of prolonged feeding with royal jelly if the expression of the
Dnmt3 gene is decreased experimentally in the larvae. Dnmt3 protein adds
methyl groups to DNA.

 

When the scientists decreased the expression of Dnmt3 in the honeybee
larvae, the results were the same as if they had fed them royal jelly.
Most of the larvae matured as queens, rather than as workers. Because
knocking down Dnmt3 had the same effects as feeding royal jelly, this
suggested that one of the major effects of royal jelly is connected with
alterations of the DNA methylation patterns on important genes6.

To back up this hypothesis, the researchers also examined the actual DNA
methylation and gene expression patterns in the different experimental
groups of bees. They showed that the brains of queens and worker bees
have a different DNA methylation pattern. The DNA methylation patterns
in the bees where Dnmt3 had been knocked down were like those of the
normal royal jelly-induced queens. This is what we would expect given
the similar phenotypes in the two groups. The gene expression patterns
in the normal queens and the Dnmt3-knockdown queens were also very
similar. The authors concluded that the nutritional effects of continual
feeding on royal jelly occurred via DNA methylation.

There are still a lot of gaps in our understanding of how nutrition in
the honeybee larva results in altered patterns of DNA methylation. One
hypothesis, based on the experiments above, is that royal jelly inhibits
the DNA methyltransferase enzyme. But so far nobody has been able to
demonstrate this experimentally. It’s therefore possible that the effect
of royal jelly on DNA methylation is indirect.

What we do know is that royal jelly influences hormonal signalling in
honeybees, and that this changes gene expression patterns. Changes in
the levels of expression of a gene often influence the epigenetic
modifications at that gene. The more highly a gene is switched on, the
more its histones become modified in ways which promote gene expression.
Something similar may happen in honeybees.

We also know that the DNA methylation systems and histone modification
systems often work together. This has created interest in the role of
histone-modifying enzymes in the control of honeybee development and
activity. When the honeybee genome was sequenced, four histone
deacetylase enzymes were identified. This was intriguing because it has
been known for some time that royal jelly contains a compound called
phenyl butyrate7. This very small molecule can inhibit histone
deacetylases but it does so rather weakly. In 2011, a group led by Dr
Mark Bedford from the MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston published an
intriguing study on another component of royal jelly. One of the other
senior authors on this paper was Professor Jean-Pierre Issa, who has
been so influential in promoting use of epigenetic drugs for the
treatment of cancer.

The researchers analysed a compound found in royal jelly called
(E)-10-hydroxy-2-decenoic acid, or 10HDA for short. The structure of
this compound is shown in Figure 14.2, along with SAHA, the histone
deacetylase inhibitor we saw in Chapter 11 that is licensed for the
treatment of cancer.

[Fig-39.eps]

 

Figure 14.2 The chemical structure of the histone deacetylase inhibitor
SAHA and 10HDA, a compound found in royal jelly. C: carbon; H: hydrogen;
N: nitrogen; O: oxygen. For simplicity, some carbon atoms have not been
explicitly shown, but are present where there is a junction of two
lines.

 

The two structures aren’t identical by any means, but they do share some
similarities. Each has a long chain of carbon atoms (the bit that looks
like a crocodile’s back in profile), and the right hand side of each
compound also looks fairly similar. Mark Bedford and his colleagues
hypothesised that 10HDA might be an inhibitor of histone deacetylases.
They performed a number of test tube and cell experiments and showed
that this was indeed the case. This means that we now know that one of
the major compounds found in royal jelly inhibits a key class of
epigenetic enzymes8.

The forgetful bee and the flexible toolkit

 

Epigenetics influences more than whether bees develop into workers or
queens. Ryszard Maleszka has also shown that DNA methylation is involved
in how honeybees process memories. When honeybees find a good source of
pollen or nectar, they fly back to the hive and tell the other members
of the colony where to head to find this great food supply. This tells
us something really important about honeybees; they can remember
information. They must be able to, or they wouldn’t be able to tell the
other bees where to go for food. Of course, it’s equally important that
the bees can forget information and replace it with new data. There’s no
point sending your co-workers to the great patch of thistles that were
in flower last week, but that have now been eaten by a grazing donkey.
The bee needs to forget last week’s thistles and remember the location
of this week’s lavender.

It’s actually possible to train honeybees to respond to certain stimuli
associated with food. Dr Maleszka and his colleagues showed that when
the bees undergo this training, the levels of Dnmt3 protein go up in the
parts of the honeybee brains which are important in learning. If the
bees are treated with a drug that inhibits the Dnmt3 protein, the
compound alters the way the bees retain memories, and also the speed
with which memories are lost9.

Although we know that DNA methylation is important in honeybee memory,
we don’t know exactly how this works. This is because it’s not clear yet
which genes become methylated when honeybees learn and acquire new
memories.

So far, we could be forgiven for thinking that honeybees and higher
organisms, including us and our mammalian relatives, all use DNA
methylation in the same way. It’s certainly true that changes in DNA
methylation are associated with alterations in developmental processes
in both humans and honeybees. It’s also true that mammals and honeybees
both use DNA methylation in the brain during memory processing.

But oddly enough, honeybees and mammals use DNA methylation in very
different ways. A carpenter has a saw in his toolbox and uses it to
build a book case. An orthopaedic surgeon has a saw on his operating
trolley and uses it to amputate a leg. Sometimes, the same bit of kit
can be used in very different ways. Mammals and honeybees both use DNA
methylation as a tool, but during the course of evolution they’ve
employed it very differently.

When mammals methylate DNA, they usually methylate the promoter regions
of genes, and not the parts that code for amino acids. Mammals also
methylate repetitive DNA elements and transposons, as we saw in Emma
Whitelaw’s work in Chapter 5. DNA methylation in mammals tends to be
associated with switching off gene expression and shutting down
dangerous elements like transposons that might otherwise cause problems
in our genomes.

Honeybees use DNA methylation in a completely different way. They don’t
methylate repetitive regions or transposons, so they presumably have
other ways of controlling these potentially troublesome elements. They
methylate CpG motifs in the stretches of genes that encode amino acids,
rather than in the promoter regions of genes. Honeybees don’t use DNA
methylation to switch off genes. In honeybees, DNA methylation is found
on genes that are expressed in all tissues, and also on genes that tend
to be expressed by many different insect species. DNA methylation acts
as a fine-tuning mechanism in honeybee tissues. It modulates the
activity of genes, turning the volume slightly up or down, rather than
acting as an on-off switch10. Patterns of DNA methylation are also
strongly correlated with control of mRNA splicing in honeybee tissues.
However, we don’t yet know how this epigenetic modification actually
influences the way in which a message is processed11.

We’re really only just beginning to unravel the subtleties of epigenetic
regulation in honeybees. For example, there are 10,000,000 CpG sites in
the honeybee genome, but less than 1 per cent of these are methylated in
any given tissue. Unfortunately, this low degree of methylation makes
analysing the effects of this epigenetic modification very challenging.
The effects of Dnmt3 knockdown show that DNA methylation is very
important in honeybee development. But, given that DNA methylation is a
fine-tuning mechanism in this species, it’s likely that Dnmt3 knockdown
results in a number of individually minor changes in a relatively large
number of genes, rather than dramatic changes in a few. These types of
subtle alterations are the most difficult to analyse, and to investigate
experimentally.

Honeybees aren’t the only insect species that has developed a complex
society with differing forms and functions for genetically identical
individuals. This model has evolved independently several times,
including in different species of wasps, termites, bees and ants. We
don’t yet know if the same epigenetic processes are used in all these
cases. Shelley Berger from the University of Pennsylvania, whose work on
ageing we encountered in Chapter 13, is involved in a large
collaboration focusing on ant genetics and epigenetics. This work has
already shown that at least two species of ants also can methylate the
DNA in their genomes. The expression of different epigenetic enzymes
varies between different social groups in the colonies12. These data
tentatively suggest that epigenetic control of colony members may prove
to be a mechanism that has evolved more than once in the social insects.

For now, however, most interest in the world outside epigenetics labs
focuses on royal jelly, as this has a long history as a health
supplement. It’s worth pointing out that there’s very little hard
evidence to support this having any major effects in humans. The 10HDA,
that Mark Bedford and his colleagues showed was a histone deacetylase
inhibitor, can affect the growth of blood vessel cells13. Theoretically,
this could be useful in cancer, as tumours rely on a good blood supply
for continuing growth. However, we’re a very long way from showing that
royal jelly can really fight off cancer, or aid human health in any
other way. If there’s one thing we do already know, it’s that bees and
humans are not the same epigenetically. Which is just as well, unless
you’re a really big fan of the monarchy …

  Chapter 15

 

  The Green Revolution

 

  To see a world in a Grain of Sand,

  And a Heaven in a Wild Flower,

  Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand,

  And eternity in an hour.

  William Blake

 

Probably all of us are familiar with the guessing game ‘animal,
vegetable or mineral’. The implicit assumption in the name of this game
is that plants and animals are completely different from one another.
True, they are both living organisms, but that’s where we feel the
similarity ends. We may be able to get on board with the idea that
somewhere back in the murky evolutionary past, humans and microscopic
worms have a shared ancestor. But how often do we ever wonder about the
biological heritage we share with plants? When do we ever think of
carnations as our cousins?

Yet animals and plants are surprisingly similar in many ways. This is
especially the case when we consider the most advanced of our green
relatives, the flowering plants. These include the grasses and cereals
that we rely on for so much of our basic food intake, and the
broad-leaved plants, from cabbages to oak trees and from rhododendrons
to cress.

Animals and the flowering plants are each made up of lots of cells; they
are multi-cellular organisms. Many of these cells are specialised for
particular functions. In the flowering plants these include cells that
transport water or sugars around the plant, the photosynthesising cells
of the leaves and the food storing cells of the roots. Like animals,
plants have specialised cells which are responsible for sexual
reproduction. The sperm nuclei are carried in pollen and fertilise a
large egg cell, which ultimately gives rise to a zygote and a new
individual plant.

The similarities between plants and animals are more fundamental than
these visible features. There are many genes in plants which have
equivalents in animals. Crucially, for our topic, plants also have a
highly developed epigenetic system. They can modify histone proteins and
DNA, just like animal cells can, and in many cases use very similar
epigenetic enzymes to those used by animals, including humans.

These genetic and epigenetic similarities all suggest that animals and
plants have common ancestors. Because of our common ancestry, we’ve
inherited similar genetic and epigenetic tool kits.

Of course, there are also really important differences between plants
and animals. Plants can create their own food, but animals can’t do
this. Plants take in basic chemicals in the environment, especially
water and carbon dioxide. Using energy from sunlight, plants can convert
these simple chemicals into complex sugars such as glucose. Nearly all
life on planet earth is dependent directly or indirectly on this amazing
process of photosynthesis.

There are two other ways in which plants and animals are very different.
Most gardeners know that you can take a cutting from a growing plant –
maybe just a small shoot – and create an entire new plant from this.
There are very few animals where this is possible, and certainly no
advanced ones. True, if certain species of lizard lose their tail, the
animal can grow a new one. But they can’t do this the other way around.
We can’t grow a new lizard from a discarded bit of tail.

This is because in most adult animals the only genuinely pluripotent
stem cells are the tightly controlled cells of the germline which give
rise to eggs or sperm. But active pluripotent stem cells are a
completely normal part of a plant. In plants these pluripotent stem
cells are found at the tips of stems and the tips of roots. Under the
right conditions, these stem cells can keep dividing to allow the plant
to grow. But under other conditions, the stem cells will differentiate
into specific cell types, such as flowers. Once such a cell has become
committed to becoming part of a petal, for example, it can’t change back
into a stem cell. Even plant cells roll down Waddington’s epigenetic
landscape eventually.

The other difference between plants and animals is really obvious.
Plants can’t move. When environmental conditions change, the plant must
adapt or die. They can’t out-run or out-fly unfavourable climates.
Plants have to find a way of responding to the environmental triggers
all around them. They need to make sure they survive long enough to
reproduce at the right time of year, when their offspring will have the
greatest chance of making it as new individuals.

Contrast this with a species such as the European swallow (Hirundo
rustica) which winters in South Africa. As summer approaches and
conditions become unbearable the swallow sets off on an epic migration.
It flies up through Africa and Europe, to spend the summer in the UK
where it raises its young. Six months later, back it goes to South
Africa.

Many of a plant’s responses to the environment are linked to changes in
cell fate. These include the change from being a pluripotent stem cell
to becoming part of a terminally differentiated flower in order to allow
sexual reproduction. Epigenetic processes play important roles in both
these events, and interact with other pathways in plant cells to
maximise the chance of reproductive success.

Not all plants use exactly the same epigenetic strategies. The
best-characterised model system is an insignificant looking little
flowering plant called Arabidopsis thaliana. It’s a member of the
mustard family and looks like any nondescript weed you can find on any
patch of wasteland. Most of the leaves grow close to the ground in a
rosette shape. It produces small white flowers on a stem about 20–25
centimetres high. It’s been a useful model system for researchers
because its genome is very compact, which makes it easy to sequence in
order to identify the genes. There are also well-developed techniques
for genetically modifying Arabidopsis thaliana. This makes it relatively
straightforward for scientists to introduce mutations into genes to
investigate their function.

Arabidopsis thaliana seeds typically germinate in early summer in the
wild. The seedlings grow, creating the rosette of leaves. This is called
the vegetative phase of plant growth. In order to produce offspring,
Arabidopsis thaliana generates flowers. It is structures in the flowers
that will generate the new eggs and sperm that will eventually lead to
new zygotes, which will be dispersed in seeds.

But here’s the problem for the plant. If it flowers late in the year,
the seeds it produces will be wasted. That’s because the weather
conditions won’t be right for the new seeds to germinate. Even if the
seeds do manage to germinate, the tender little seedlings are likely to
be killed off by harsh weather like frost.

The adult Arabidopsis thaliana needs to keep its powder dry. It has a
much greater chance of lots of its offspring surviving if it waits until
the next spring until it flowers. The adult plant can survive winter
weather that would kill off a seedling. This is exactly what Arabidopsis
thaliana does. The plant ‘waits’ for spring and only then does it
produce flowers.

The rites of spring

 

The technical term for this is vernalisation. Vernalisation means that a
plant has to undergo a prolonged cold period (winter, usually) before it
can flower. This is very common in plants with an annual life-cycle,
especially in the temperate regions of the earth where the seasons are
well-defined. Vernalisation doesn’t just affect broad-leaved plants like
Arabidopsis thaliana. Many cereals also show this effect, especially
crops like winter barley and winter wheat. In many cases, the prolonged
period of cold needs to be followed by an increase in day length if
flowering is to take place. The combination of the two stimuli ensures
that flowering occurs at the most appropriate time of year.

Vernalisation has some very interesting features. When the plant first
begins to sense and respond to cold weather, this may be many weeks or
months before it starts to flower. The plant may continue to grow
vegetatively through cell division during the cold period. When new
seeds are produced, after the vernalisation of the parent plant, the
seeds are ‘reset’. The new plants they produce from the seeds will
themselves have to go through their own cold season before flowering1.

These features of vernalisation are all very reminiscent of epigenetic
phenomena in animals. Specifically:

1.  The plant displays some form of molecular memory, because the
    stimulus and the final event are separated by weeks or months. We
    can compare this with abnormal stress responses in adult rodents
    that were ‘neglected’ as infants.
2.  The memory is maintained even after cells divide. We can compare
    this with animal cells that continue to perform in a certain way
    after a stimulus to the parent cell, such as in normal development
    or in cancer progression.
3.  The memory is lost in the next generation (the seeds). This is
    comparable with the way that most changes to the somatic tissues are
    ‘wiped clean’ in animals so that Lamarckian inheritance is
    exceptional, rather than common.

So, at a phenomenon level, vernalisation looks very epigenetic. In
recent years, a number of labs have confirmed that epigenetic processes
underlie this, at the chromatin modification level.

The key gene involved in vernalisation is called FLOWERING LOCUS C or
FLC for short. FLC encodes a protein called a transcriptional repressor.
It binds to other genes and stops them getting switched on. There are
three genes that are particularly important for flowering in Arabidopsis
thaliana, called FT, SOC1 and FD. Figure 15.1 shows how FLC interacts
with these genes, and the consequences this has for flowering. It also
shows how the epigenetic status of FLC changes after a period of
prolonged cold.

[Fig-40.eps]

 

Figure 15.1 Epigenetic modifications regulate the expression of the FLC
gene, which represses the genes which promote flowering. The epigenetic
modifications on the FLC gene are controlled by temperature.

 

Before winter, the FLC gene promoter carries lots of histone
modifications that switch on gene expression. Because of this, the FLC
gene is highly expressed, and the protein it codes for binds to the
target genes and represses them. This keeps the plant in its normal
growing vegetative phase. After winter, the histone modifications at the
FLC gene promoter change to repressive ones. These switch off the FLC
gene. The FLC protein levels drop, which removes the repression on the
target genes. The increased periods of sunlight during spring activate
expression of the FT gene. It’s essential that FLC levels have gone down
by this stage, because if FLC levels are high, the FT gene finds it
difficult to react to the stimulus from sunlight2.

Experiments with mutated versions of epigenetic enzymes have shown that
the changes in histone modifications at the FLC gene are critically
important in controlling the flowering response. For example, there is a
gene called SDG27 which adds methyl groups to the lysine amino acid at
position 4 on histone H3, so it is an epigenetic writer. This
methylation is associated with active gene expression. The SDG27 gene
can be mutated experimentally, so that it no longer encodes an active
protein. Plants with this mutation have less of this active histone
modification at the FLC gene promoter. They produce less FLC protein,
and so aren’t so good at repressing the genes that trigger flowering.
The SDG27 mutants flower earlier than the normal plants3. This
demonstrates that the epigenetic modifications at the FLC promoter don’t
simply reflect the activity levels of the gene, they actually alter the
expression. The modifications do actually cause the change in
expression.

Cold weather induces a protein in plant cells called VIN3. This protein
can bind to the FLC promoter. VIN3 is a type of protein called a
chromatin remodeller. It can change how tightly chromatin is wound up.
When VIN3 binds to the FLC promoter, it alters the local structure of
the chromatin, making it more accessible to other proteins. Often,
opening up chromatin leads to an increase in gene expression. However,
in this case, VIN3 attracts yet another enzyme that can add methyl
groups to histone proteins. However, this particular enzyme adds methyl
groups to the lysine amino acid at position 27 on histone H3. This
modification represses gene expression and is one of the most important
methods that the plant cell uses to switch off the FLC gene4,5.

This still raises the question of how cold weather results in epigenetic
changes to the FLC gene specifically. What is the targeting mechanism?
We still don’t know all the details, but one of the stages has been
elucidated. Following cold weather, the cells in Arabidopsis thaliana
produce a long RNA, which doesn’t code for protein. This RNA is called
COLDAIR. The COLDAIR non-coding RNA is localised specifically at the FLC
gene. When localised, it binds to the enzyme complex that creates the
important repressive mark at position 27 on histone H3. COLDAIR
therefore acts as a targeting mechanism for the enzyme complex6.

When Arabidopsis thaliana produces new seeds, the repressive histone
marks at the FLC gene are removed. They are replaced by activating
chromatin modifications. This ensures that when the seeds germinate the
FLC gene will be switched on, and repress flowering until the new plants
have grown through winter.

From these data we can see that flowering plants clearly use some of the
same epigenetic machinery as many animal cells. These include
modifications of histone proteins, and the use of long non-coding RNAs
to target these modifications. True, animal and plant cells use these
tools for different end-points – remember the orthopaedic surgeon and
the carpenter from the previous chapter – but this is strong evidence
for common ancestry and one basic set of tools.

The epigenetic similarities between plants and animals don’t end here
either. Just like animals, plants also produce thousands of different
small RNA molecules. These don’t code for proteins, instead they silence
genes. It was scientists working with plants who first realised that
these very small RNA molecules can move from one cell to another,
silencing gene expression as they go7,8. This spreads the epigenetic
response to a stimulus from one initial location to distant parts of the
organism.

The kamikaze cereal

 

Research in Arabidopsis thaliana has shown that plants use epigenetic
modifications to regulate thousands of genes9. This regulation probably
serves the same purposes as in animal cells. It helps cells to maintain
appropriate but short-term responses to environmental stimuli, and it
also locks differentiated cells in permanent patterns of specific gene
expression. Because of epigenetic mechanisms we humans don’t have teeth
in our eyeballs, and plants don’t have leaves growing out of their
roots.

Flowering plants share a characteristic epigenetic phenomenon with
mammals, and with no other members of the animal kingdom. Flowering
plants are the only organisms we know of besides placental mammals in
which genes are imprinted. Imprinting is the process we examined in
Chapter 8, where the expression pattern of a gene is dependent on
whether it was inherited from the mother or father.

At first glance, this similarity between flowering plants and mammals
seems positively bizarre. But there’s an interesting parallel between us
and our floral relations. In all higher mammals, the fertilised zygote
is the source of both the embryo and the placenta. The placenta
nourishes the developing embryo, but doesn’t ultimately form part of the
new individual. Something rather similar happens when fertilisation
occurs in flowering plants. The process is slightly more complicated,
but the final fertilised seed contains the embryo and an accessory
tissue called the endosperm, shown in Figure 15.2.

[Fig-41.eps]

 

Figure 15.2 The major anatomical components of a seed. The relatively
small embryo that will give rise to the new plant is nourished by the
endosperm, in a manner somewhat analogous to the nourishment of
mammalian embryos by the placenta.

 

Just like the placenta in mammalian development, the endosperm nourishes
the embryo. It promotes development and germination but it doesn’t
contribute genetically to the next generation. The presence of any
accessory tissues during development, be this a placenta or an
endosperm, seems to favour the generation of imprinted control of the
expression of a select group of genes.

In fact, something very sophisticated happens in the endosperm of seeds.
Just like most animal genomes, the genomes of flowering plants contain
retrotransposons. These are usually referred to as TEs – transposable
elements. These are the repetitive elements that don’t encode proteins,
but can cause havoc if they are activated. This is especially because
they can move around in the genome and disrupt gene expression.

Normally such TEs are tightly repressed, but in the endosperm these
sequences are switched on. The cells of the endosperm create small RNA
molecules from these TEs. These small RNAs travel out from the endosperm
into the embryo. They find the TEs in the embryo’s genome that have the
same sequence as themselves. These TE small RNA molecules then seem to
recruit the machinery that permanently inactivates these potentially
dangerous genomic elements. The risk to the endosperm genome through
re-activation of the TEs is high. But because the endosperm doesn’t
contribute to the next generation genetically, it can undertake this
suicide mission, for the greater good10,11,12,13.

Although mammals and flowering plants both carry out imprinting, they
seem to use slightly different mechanisms. Mammals inactivate the
appropriate copy of the imprinted gene by using DNA methylation. In
plants, the paternally-derived copy of the gene is always the one that
carries the DNA methylation. However, it’s not always this methylated
copy of the gene that is inactivated14. In plant imprinting, therefore,
DNA methylation tells the cell how a gene was inherited, not how the
gene should be expressed.

There are some fundamental aspects of DNA methylation that are quite
similar between plants and animals. Plant genomes encode active DNA
methyltransferase enzymes, and also proteins that can ‘read’ methylated
DNA. Just like primordial germ cells in mammals, certain plant cells can
actively remove methylation from DNA. In plants, we even know which
enzymes carry out this reaction15. One is called DEMETER, after the
mother of Persephone in Greek myths. Demeter was the goddess of the
harvest and it was because of the deal that she struck with Hades, the
god of the Underworld, that we have seasons.

But DNA methylation is also an aspect of epigenetics where there are
clear differences in the way plants and higher animals use the same
basic system. One of the most obvious differences is that plants don’t
just methylate at CpG motifs (cytosine followed by a guanine). Although
this is the most common sequence targeted by their DNA
methyltransferases, plants will also methylate a cytosine followed by
almost any other base16.

A lot of DNA methylation in plants is focused around non-expressed
repetitive elements, just like in mammals. But a big difference becomes
apparent when we examine the pattern of DNA methylation in expressed
genes. About 5 per cent of expressed plant genes have detectable DNA
methylation at their promoters, but over 30 per cent are methylated in
the regions that encode amino acids, in the so-called body of the genes.
Genes with methylation in the body regions tend to be expressed in a
wide range of tissues, and are expressed at moderate to high levels in
these tissues17.

The high levels of DNA methylation at repetitive elements in plants are
very similar to the pattern at repetitive elements in the chromatin of
higher animals such as mammals. By contrast, the methylation in the
bodies of widely expressed genes is much more like that seen in
honeybees (which don’t methylate their repetitive elements). This
doesn’t mean that plants are some strange epigenetic hybrid of insects
and mammals. Instead, it suggests that evolution has a limited set of
raw materials, but isn’t too obsessive about how it uses them.

  Chapter 16

 

  The Ways Ahead

 

  Prediction is very difficult, especially about the future.

  Niels Bohr

 

One of the most exciting things about epigenetics is the fact that in
some ways it’s very accessible to non-specialists. We can’t all have
access to the latest experimental techniques, so not all of us will
unravel the chromatin changes that underlie epigenetic events. But all
of us can examine the world around us and make predictions. All we need
to do is look to see if a phenomenon meets the two most essential
criteria in epigenetics. By doing this, we can view the natural world,
including humans, in a completely new light. These two criteria are the
ones we have returned to over and over again throughout this book. A
phenomenon is likely to be influenced by epigenetic alterations in DNA
and its accompanying proteins if one or both of the following conditions
are met:

1.  Two things are genetically identical, but phenotypically variable;
2.  An organism continues to be influenced by an event long after this
    initiating event has occurred.

We always have to apply a common sense filter, of course. If someone
loses their leg in a motorbike accident, the fact that they are still
minus a leg twenty years later doesn’t mean that we can invoke an
epigenetic mechanism. On the other hand, that person may continue to
have the sensation that they have both legs. This phantom limb syndrome
might well be influenced by programmed gene expression patterns in the
central nervous system that are maintained in part by epigenetic
modifications.

We are sometimes so overwhelmed by the technologies used in modern
biology that we forget how much we can learn just by looking
thoughtfully. For example, we don’t always need sophisticated laboratory
equipment to determine if two phenotypically different things are
genetically identical. Here are a couple of examples with which we are
all familiar. Maggots turn into flies and caterpillars turn into
butterflies. An individual maggot and the adult fly into which it
finally develops must have the same genetic code. It’s not as if a
maggot can request a new genome as it metamorphoses. So, the maggot and
the fly use the same genome in completely different ways. The painted
lady caterpillar has interesting spikes all over its body and is fairly
dull in colour. Like a maggot, it has no wings. The painted lady
butterfly is a beautiful creature, with enormous wings coloured black
and vivid orange, and it has no big spikes on its body. Once again, an
individual caterpillar and the butterfly into which it develops must
have the exact same DNA script. But the final productions from these
scripts differ enormously. We can hypothesise that this is likely to
involve epigenetic events.

The stoat Mustela ermine is found in Europe and North America. It’s an
athletic little predator in the weasel family, and in summer the fur on
its back is a warm brown and its front is a creamy white. In cold
climates its coat turns almost completely white all over in the winter,
except for the tip of its tail, which remains black. With the arrival of
spring, the stoat reverts to its summer colours. We know that there are
hormonal effects that are required for this seasonal change in coat
colour. It’s pretty reasonable to hypothesise that these influence the
relevant expression of coat colour genes by methods which include
epigenetic modifications to chromatin.

In mammals, there’s usually a clear genetic reason why males are males
and females are females. A functional Y chromosome leads to the male
phenotype. In lots of reptile species, including crocodiles and
alligators, the two sexes are genetically identical. You can’t predict
the sex of a crocodile from its chromosomes. The sex of a crocodile or
an alligator depends on the temperature during critical stages in the
development of the egg – the same blueprint can be used to create either
a male or a female croc1. We know that hormonal signalling is involved
in this process. There hasn’t been much investigation of whether or not
epigenetic modifications play a role in establishing or stabilising the
gender-specific patterns of gene expression, but it seems likely.

Understanding the mechanisms of sex determination in crocodiles and
their relatives may become a rather important conservation issue in the
near future. The global shift in temperatures due to climate change
could have adverse consequences for these reptiles, if the populations
become very skewed in favour of one sex over another. Some authors have
even speculated that such an effect may have contributed to the
extinction of the dinosaurs2.

The ideas above are quite straightforward, easily testable hypotheses.
We can generate a lot more like these by simple observation. It’s a lot
riskier to make broad claims about what other more general developments
we might expect to see in epigenetic research. The field is still young,
and moving in all sorts of unexpected directions. But let’s render
ourselves hostages to fortune, and make a few predictions anyway.

We’ll start with a fairly specific one. By 2016 at least one Nobel Prize
for Physiology or Medicine will have been awarded to some leading
workers in this field. The question is to whom, because there are plenty
of worthy candidates.

For many people in the field it’s extraordinary that this hasn’t yet
been awarded to Mary Lyon for her remarkably prescient work on X
inactivation. Although her key papers that laid the conceptual framework
for X inactivation didn’t contain much original experimental data, this
is also true of James Watson and Francis Crick’s original paper on the
structure of DNA3. It’s always tempting to speculate the lack of a Nobel
Prize might be down to gender, but that’s partly because of a myth that
has grown up around Rosalind Franklin. She was the X-ray
crystallographer whose data were essential for the development of the
Watson-Crick model of DNA. When the Nobel Prize was awarded to Watson
and Crick in 1962 it was also awarded to Rosalind Franklin’s lab head,
Professor Maurice Wilkins from Kings College, London. But Rosalind
Franklin didn’t miss out on the prize because she was a woman. She
missed out because she had, tragically, died of ovarian cancer at the
age of 37, and the Nobel Prize is never awarded posthumously.

Bruce Cattanach is a scientist we have met before in these pages. In
addition to his work on parent-of-origin effects, he also performed some
of the key early experimental studies on the molecular mechanisms behind
X inactivation4. He would be considered a worthy co-recipient with Mary
Lyon by most researchers. Mary Lyon and Bruce Cattanach performed much
of their seminal research in the 1960s and are long-since retired.
However, Robert Edwards, the pioneer of in vitro fertilisation, received
the 2010 Nobel Prize in his mid-eighties, so there is still time and a
little hope left for Professors Lyon and Cattanach.

The work of John Gurdon and Shinya Yamanaka on cellular reprogramming
has revolutionised our understanding of how cell fate is controlled, and
they must be hot favourites for a trip to Stockholm soon. A slightly
less mainstream but appealing combination would be Azim Surani and Emma
Whitelaw. Together their work has been seminal in demonstrating not only
how the epigenome is usually reset in sexual reproduction, but also how
this process is occasionally subverted to allow the inheritance of
acquired characteristics. David Allis has led the field in the study of
epigenetic modifications to histones, and must also be an attractive
choice, possibly in combination with some of the leading lights in DNA
methylation, especially Adrian Bird and Peter Jones.

Peter Jones has been a pioneer in the development of epigenetic
therapies and this is another growth area for epigenetics. Histone
deacetylase inhibitors and DNA methyltransferase inhibitors have been in
the vanguard of these approaches. The vast majority of clinical trials
with these compounds have been in cancer, but this is starting to
change. An inhibitor of the sirtuin class of histone deacetylases is in
early clinical trials for Huntington’s disease, the devastating
inherited neurodegenerative disorder5. The greatest excitement, for both
cancer and non-oncology conditions, is currently centred around the
development of drugs that inhibit more focused epigenetic enzymes. These
include enzymes that change just one modification at one specific amino
acid position on histone proteins. Hundreds of millions of dollars are
being invested worldwide in this sphere, either in new biotech
companies, or by the pharmaceutical giants. We are likely to see new
drugs from these efforts enter clinical trials for cancer in the next
five years, and clinical trials for other less immediately
life-threatening conditions within a decade6.

Our increased understanding of epigenetics, and especially of
transgenerational inheritance, may also create problems in drug
discovery, as well as opportunities. If we create new drugs that
interfere with epigenetic processes, what if these drugs also affect the
reprogramming that normally occurs during the production of germ cells?
This could theoretically result in physiological changes that don’t just
affect the person who was treated, but also their children or
grandchildren. We maybe shouldn’t even restrict our concerns to
chemicals that specifically target epigenetic enzymes. As we saw in
Chapter 8, the environmental pollutant vinclozolin can affect rodents
for many generations. If the authorities that regulate the licensing of
new drugs begin to insist on transgenerational studies, this will add
enormously to the cost and complexity of developing new drugs.

At first glance, this might seem perfectly reasonable; after all, we
want drugs to be as safe as possible. But what happens to all the
patients who desperately need new drugs to save them from
life-threatening diseases, or who need better drugs so that they can
live healthy and dignified lives free of pain and disability? The longer
it takes to get new drugs to the market, the longer those patients
suffer. It’s going to be very interesting to see how drug companies,
regulators and patient advocacy groups deal with this issue over the
next ten or fifteen years.

Transgenerational effects of epigenetic changes may be one of the areas
with the greatest impact on human health over the coming decades, not
because of drugs or pollutants but because of food and nutrition. We
started this journey into the epigenetic landscape by looking at the
Dutch Hunger Winter. This had consequences not just for those who lived
through it but for their descendants. We are in the grip of a global
obesity epidemic. Even if our societies manage to get control of this
(and very few western cultures show many signs of doing so) we may
already have generated a less than optimal epigenetic legacy for our
children and grandchildren.

Nutrition in general is one area where we can predict epigenetics will
come to the fore in the next ten years. Here are just a few examples of
what we know at the moment.

Folic acid is one of the supplements recommended for pregnant women.
Increasing the supply of folic acid in the very early stages of
pregnancy has been a public health triumph, as it has led to a major
drop in the incidence of spina bifida in newborns7. Folic acid is
required for the production of a chemical called SAM (S-adenosyl
methionine). SAM is the molecule that donates the methyl group when DNA
methyltransferases modify DNA. If baby rats are fed a diet that is low
in folic acid, they develop abnormal regulation of imprinted regions of
the genome8. We are only just beginning to unravel how many of the
beneficial effects of folic acid may be mediated through epigenetic
mechanisms.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors in our diets may also play useful roles
in preventing cancer and possibly other disorders. The data are
relatively speculative at the moment. Sodium butyrate in cheese,
sulphoraphane in broccoli and diallyl disulphide in garlic are all weak
inhibitors of histone deacetylases. Researchers have hypothesised that
the release of these compounds from food during digestion may help to
modulate gene expression and cell proliferation in the gut9. In theory,
this could lower the risk of developing cancerous changes in the colon.
The bacteria in our intestines also naturally produce butyrate from the
breakdown of foodstuffs10, especially plant-derived materials, which is
another good reason to eat our greens.

There’s a speculative but fascinating case study from Iceland on how
diet may epigenetically influence a disease. It concerns a rare genetic
disease called hereditary cystatin C amyloid angiopathy, which causes
premature death through strokes. In the Icelandic families in which some
people suffer from the disease, the patients carry a particular mutation
in the key gene. Because of the relatively isolated nature of Icelandic
societies, and the country’s excellent record keeping, researchers were
able to trace this disease back through the affected families. What they
found was quite remarkable. Until about 1820, people with this mutation
lived until around the age of 60 before they succumbed to the disease.
Between 1820 and 1900, the life expectancy for those with the same
disorder dropped to about 30 years of age, which is where it has
remained. The scientists speculated in their original paper that an
environmental change in the period from 1820 onwards altered the way
that cells respond to and control the effects of the mutation11.

At a conference in Cambridge in 2010, the same authors reported that one
of the major environmental changes in Iceland from 1820 to the present
day was a shift from a traditional diet to more mainstream European
fare12. The traditional Icelandic diet contained exceptionally high
quantities of dried fish and fermented butter. The latter is very high
in butyric acid, the weak histone deacetylase inhibitor. Histone
deacetylase inhibitors can alter the function of muscle fibres in blood
vessels13, which is relevant to the type of stroke that patients with
this mutation suffer. There is no formal proof yet that it’s the drop in
consumption of dietary histone deacetylase inhibitors that has led to
the earlier deaths in this patient group, but it’s a fascinating
hypothesis.

The fundamental science of epigenetics is the area that is most
difficult to make predictions about. One fairly safe bet is that
epigenetic mechanisms will continue to crop up in unexpected parts of
science. A good recent example of this is in the field of circadian
rhythms, the natural 24-hour cycle of physiology and biochemistry found
in most living species. A histone acetyltransferase has been shown to be
the key protein involved in setting this rhythm14, and the rhythm is
adjusted by at least one other epigenetic enzyme15.

We are also likely to find that some epigenetic enzymes influence cells
in many different ways. That’s because quite a few of these enzymes
don’t just modify chromatin. They can also modify other proteins in the
cell, so may act on lots of different pathways at once. In fact, it has
been proposed that some of the histone modifying genes actually evolved
before cells contained histones16. This would suggest that these enzymes
originally had other functions, and have been press-ganged by evolution
into becoming controllers of gene expression. It wouldn’t therefore be
surprising to find that some of the enzymes have dual functions in our
cells.

Some of the most fundamental issues around the molecular machinery of
epigenetics remain very mysterious. Our knowledge of how specific
modifications are established at selected positions in the genome is
really sketchy. We are starting to see a role for non-coding RNAs in
this process, but there are still multiple gaps in our understanding.
Similarly we have almost no idea of how histone modifications are
transmitted from mother cell to daughter cell. We’re pretty sure this
happens, as it is part of the molecular memory of cells that allows them
to maintain cell fate, but we don’t know how. When DNA is replicated,
the histone proteins get pushed to one side. The new copy of the DNA may
end up with relatively few of the modified histones. Instead, it may be
coated with virgin histones with hardly any modifications. This is
corrected very quickly, but we have almost no understanding of how this
happens, even though it is one of the most fundamental issues in the
whole field of epigenetics.

It’s possible that we won’t be able to solve this mystery until we have
the technology and imagination to stop thinking in two dimensions and
move to a three-dimensional world. We have become very used to thinking
of the genome in linear terms, as strings of bases that are just read in
a straightforward fashion. Yet the reality is that different regions of
the genome bend and fold, reaching out to each other to create new
combinations and regulatory sub-groups. We think of our genetic material
as a normal script, but it’s more like the fold-in from the back of Mad
magazine, where folding an image in a particular way created a new
picture. Understanding this process may be critical for truly
unravelling how epigenetic modifications and gene combinations work
together to create the miracle of the worm or the oak or the crocodile.

Or us.

So here’s the summary of what epigenetic research will hold in the next
decade. There will be hope and hype, over-promising, blind alleys, wrong
turns and occasionally even some discredited research. Science is a
human endeavour and sometimes it goes wrong. But at the end of the next
ten years we will understand more of the answers to some of biology’s
most important questions. Right now we really can’t predict what those
answers might be, and in some cases we’re not even sure of the
questions, but one thing is for sure.

The epigenetics revolution is underway.

  Notes

 

Introduction

1.  For these and many others, see
    http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/807126.stm
2.  A useful starting point for descriptions of the symptoms of
    schizophrenia, its effects on patients and their families, and
    relevant statistics is www.schizophrenia.com

Chapter 1

1.  http://www.britishlivertrust.org.uk/home/the-liver.aspx
2.  http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/News/2010/Features/WTX063605.htm
3.  Quoted in the The Scientist Speculates, ed. Good, I.J. (1962),
    published by Heinemann.
4.  Key papers from this programme of work include: Gurdon et al. (1958)
    Nature 182: 64–5; Gurdon (1960) J Embryol Exp Morphol. 8: 505–26;
    Gurdon( 1962) J Hered. 53: 5–9; Gurdon (1962) Dev Biol. 4: 256–73;
    Gurdon (1962) J Embryol Exp Morphol. 10: 622–40.
5.  Waddington, C. H. (1957), The Strategy of the Genes, published by
    Geo Allen & Unwin.
6.  Campbell et al. 1996 Nature 380: 64–6.

Chapter 2

1.  For a useful review of the state of knowledge at the time see
    Rao, M. (2004) Dev Biol. 275: 269–86.
2.  Takahashi and Yamanaka (2006), Cell 126: 663–76.
3.  Pang et al. (2011), Nature online publication May 26.
4.  Alipio et al. (2010), Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA 107: 13426–31.
5.  Nakagawa et al. (2008), Nat Biotechnol. 26: 101–6.
6.  See, for example, Baharvand et al. (2010) Methods Mol Biol. 584:
    425–43.
7.  Gaspar and Thrasher (2005), Expert Opin Biol Ther. 5: 1175–82.
8.  Lapillonne et al. (2010), Haematologica 95: 1651–9.

Chapter 3

1.  See http://genome.wellcome.ac.uk/doc_WTD020745.html for a wealth of
    useful genome-related facts and figures.
2.  Schoenfelder et al. (2010), Nat Genet. 42: 53–61.

Chapter 4

1.  Kruczek and Doerfler (1982), EMBO J. 1:409–14.
2.  Bird et al. (1985), Cell 40: 91–99.
3.  Lewis et al. (1992), Cell 69: 905–14.
4.  Nan et al. (1998), Nature 393: 386–9.
5.  For a recent review of the actions of MeCP2, see Adkins and Georgel
    (2011), Biochem Cell Biol. 89: 1–11.
6.  Guy et al. (2007), Science 315: 1143–7.
7.  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RyAvKGmAElQ&feature=related
8.  The most important papers from the Allis lab in 1996 were: Brownell
    et al. (1996), Cell 84: 843–51; Vettese-Dadey et al. (1996), EMBO J.
    15: 2508–18; Kuo et al. (1996), Nature 383: 269–72.
9.  A useful review by one of the leading researchers in the field is
    Kouzarides, T. (2007) Cell 128: 693–705.
10. Jenuwein and Allis (2001), Science 293: 1074–80.
11. Ng et al. (2010), Nat Genet. 42: 790–3.
12. Laumonnier et al. (2005), J Med Genet. 42: 780–6.

Chapter 5

1.  Fraga et al. (2005), Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA 102: 10604–9.
2.  Ollikainen et al. (2010), Human Molecular Genetics 19: 4176–88.
3.  http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/evolution/library/04/4/l_044_02.html
4.  http://www.evolutionpages.com/Mouse%20genome%20home.htm
5.  Gartner, K. (1990), Lab Animal 24:71–7.
6.  Whitelaw et al. (2010), Genome Biology.
7.  Tobi et al. (2009), HMG.
8.  Kaminen-Ahola et al. (2010).

Chapter 6

1.  If you want to know more, try Arthur Koestler’s highly readable
    though exceptionally partisan book, The Case of the Midwife Toad.
2.  Lumey et al. (1995), Eur J Obstet Reprod Biol. 61: 23–20.
3.  Lumey (1998), Proceedings of the Nutrition Society 57: 129–135.
4.  Kaati et al. (2002), EJHG 10: 682–688.
5.  Morgan et al. (1999), Nature 23: 314–8.
6.  Wolff et al. (1998), FASEB J 12: 949–957.
7.  Rakyan et al. (2003), PNAS 100: 2538–2543.
8.  World Cancer Research Fund figures http://tinyurl.com/47uosv4
9.  www.nhs.uk
10. Waterland et al. (2007), FASEB J 21: 3380–3385.
11. Ng et al. (2010), Nature 467: 963–966.
12. Carone et al. (2010) Cell 143: 1084–1096.
13. Anway et al. (2005) Science 308: 1466–1469.
14. Guerrero-Bosagna et al. (2010), PLoS One: 5.

Chapter 7

1.  Surani, Barton and Norris (1984), Nature 308: 548–550.
2.  Barton, Surani and Norris (1984), Nature 311: 374–376.
3.  Surani, Barton and Norris (1987), Nature 326: 395–397.
4.  McGrath and Solter (1984), Cell 37: 179–183.
5.  Cattanach and Kirk (1985), Nature 315: 496–498.
6.  Hammoud et al. (2009) Nature 460: 473–478.
7.  Reik et al. (1987), Nature 328: 248–251.
8.  Sapienza et al. (1987), Nature 328: 251–254.
9.  Rakyan et al. (2003), PNAS 100: 2538–2543.

Chapter 8

1.  Surani, Barton and Norris (1984), Nature 308: 548–550.
2.  Barton, Surani and Norris (1984), Nature 311: 374–376.
3.  Surani, Barton and Norris (1987), Nature 326: 395–397.
4.  Cattanach and Kirk (1985), Nature 315: 496–8.
5.  De Chiara et al. (1991), Cell 64: 845–859.
6.  Barlow et al. (1991), Nature 349: 84–87.
7.  Reviewed in Butler (2009), Journal of Assisted Reproduction and
    Genetics: 477–486
8.  Prader, A., Labhart, A. and Willi, H. (1956), Schweiz Med Wschr. 86:
    1260–1261.
9.  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/176270
10. Angelman, H. (1965), ‘Puppet children’: a report of three cases. Dev
    Med Child Neurol. 7: 681–688.
11. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/105830
12. Knoll et al.(1989), American Journal of Medical Genetics 32:
    285–290.
13. Nicholls et al. (1989), Nature 342: 281–185.
14. Malcolm et al. (1991), The Lancet 337: 694–697.
15. Wiedemann (1964), J Genet Hum. 13: 223.
16. Beckwith (1969), Birth Defects 5: 188.
17. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/130650
18. Silver et al. (1953), Pediatrics 12: 368–376.
19. Russell (1954), Proc Royal Soc Medicine. 47: 1040–1044.
20. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/180860
21. For a useful review, see Gabory et al. (2010), BioEssays 32:
    473–480.
22. Frost & Moore (2010), PLoS Genetics 6 e1001015.
23. Ohinata et al. (2005), Nature 436: 207–213.
24. Buiting et al. (2003), American Journal of Medical Genetics 72:
    571–577.
25. Hammoud et al. (2009), Nature 460: 473–478.
26. Ooi et al. (2007), Nature 448: 714–717.
27. Stadtfeld et al. (2010), Nature 465: 175–81.
28. See Butler (2009), J Assist Reprod Genet. 26: 477–486 for a useful
    review.
29. Kono et al. (2004), Nature 428: 860–864.
30. Blewitt et al. (2006), PLoS Genetics 2: 399–405.
31. See, for example,
    http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2010/aug/04/cloned-meat-british-bulls-fsa?INTCMP=SRCH
32. For a recent review, see Bukulmez, O. (2009) Curr Opin Obstet
    Gynecol. 21: 260–4.

Chapter 9

1.  Jäger et al. (1990), Nature 348: 452–4.
2.  Margarit et al. (2000), American Journal of Medical Genetics 90:
    25–8.
3.  For a good review of this, see Graves (2010), Placenta, Supplement A
    Trophoblast Research 24: S27–S32.
4.  Lyon, M. F. (1961), Nature 190: 372–373.
5.  Lyon, M. F. (1962), American Journal of Human Genetics 14: 135–148.
6.  For a useful review, see Okamoto and Heard (2009), Chromosome Res.
    17: 659–69.
7.  McGrath and Solter (1984), Cell 37: 179–83.
8.  Cattanach and Isaacson (1967), Genetics 57: 231–246.
9.  Rastan and Robertson (1985), J Embryol Exp Morphol. 90: 379–88.
10. Brown et al. (1991), Nature 349: 38–44.
11. Borsani et al. (1991), Nature 351: 325–329.
12. Brown et al. (1992), Cell 71: 527–542.
13. Brockdorff et al. (1992), Cell 71: 515–526.
14. Borsani et al. (1991), Nature 351: 325–329.
15. For a good review, see Lee, J. T. (2010) Cold Spring Harbor
    Perspectives in Biology 2 a003749.
16. Lee et al. (1996), Cell 86: 83–84.
17. Xu et al. (2006), Science 311: 1149–52.
18. Lee et al. (1999), Nature Genetics 21: 400–404.
19. Navarro et al. (2008), Science 321: 1693–1695.
20. Maherali et al. (2007), Cell Stem Cell 1: 55–70.
21. Zonana et al. (1993), Amer J Human Genetics 52: 78–84.
22. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/305100
23. Reviewed in Pinto et al. (2010), Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases
    5: 14–23.
24. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/310200
25. Pena et al. (1987), J Neurol Sci. 79: 337–344.
26. Gordon (2004), Science 306: 496–499.
27. For a good review of this, see Graves (2010), Placenta Supplement A
    Trophoblast Research 24: S27–S32.
28. Rao et al. (1997), Nature Genetics 16: 54–63.

Chapter 10

1.  From Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers (1950).
2.  Mulder et al. (1975), Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 39: 397–400.
3.  Ohno (1972), Brookhaven Symposia in Biology 23: 366–370.
4.  See Orgel and Crick (1980), Nature 284: 604–607.
5.  See Doolittle and Sapienza (1980), Nature 284: 601–603.
6.  Mattick (2009), Annals N Y Acad Sci. 1178: 29–46.
7.  http://genome.wellcome.ac.uk/node30006.html
8.  http://wiki.wormbase.org/index.php/WS205
9.  For a useful review see Qureshi et al. (2010), Brain Research 1338:
    20–35.
10. Clark and Mattick (2011), Seminars in Cell and Developmental
    Biology, in press at time of publication.
11. Carninci et al. (2005), Science 309: 1559–1563.
12. Nagano et al. (2008), Science 322: 1717–1720.
13. Zhao et al. (2010), Molecular Cell 40: 939–953.
14. Garber et al. (1983), EMBO J. 2: 2027–36.
15. Rinn et al. (2007), Cell 129: 1311–1323.
16. Ørom et al. (2010), Cell 143: 46–58.
17. Lee et al. (1993), Cell 75: 843–854.
18. Wightman et al. (1993), Cell 75: 858–62.
19. For a good review, see Bartel (2009), Cell 136: 215–233.
20. Mattick, J. S. (2010), BioEssays 32: 548–552.
21. Chimpanzee Sequencing and Analysis Consortium (2005), Nature 437:
    69–87.
22. Athanasiasdis et al. (2004), PLoS Biol. 2: e391.
23. Paz-Yaacov et al. (2010), Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA 107: 12174–9.
24. Melton et al. (2010), Nature 463: 621–628.
25. Yu et al. (2007), Science 318: 1917–20.
26. Marson et al. (2008), Cell 134: 521–33.
27. Judson et al. (2009), Nature Biotechnology 27: 459–461.
28. Reviewed in Pauli et al. (2011), Nature Reviews Genetics 12:
    136–149.
29. Giraldez et al. (2006), Science 312: 75–79.
30. West et al. (2009), Nature 460: 909–913.
31. Vagin et al. (2009), Genes Dev. 23: 1749–62.
32. Deng and Lin (2002), Developmental Cell 2: 819–830.
33. Aravin et al. (2008), Molecular Cell 31: 785–799.
34. Kuramochi-Miyagawa et al. (2008), Genes and Development 22: 908–917.
35. Reviewed in Mattick et al. (2009), BioEssays 31: 51–59.
36. Wagner et al. (2008), Dev Cell. 14: 962–9.
37. Lewejohann et al. (2004), Behav Brain Res. 154: 273–89.
38. Clop et al. (2006), Nature Genetics 38: 813–818.
39. Abelson et al. (2005), Science 310: 317–320.
40. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/188400
41. Strak et al. (2008), Nature Genetics 40: 751–760.
42. Calin et al. (2004), Proc Nat Acad Sci. USA 101: 2999–3004.
43. Volinia et al. (2006), Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA 103: 2257–2261.
44. For a useful review see Garzon et al. (2010), Nature Reviews Drug
    Discovery 9: 775–789.
45. Melo et al. (2009), Nature Genetics 41: 365–370.

Chapter 11

1.  Karon et al. (1973), Blood 42: 359–65.
2.  Constantinides et al. (1977), Nature 267: 364–366.
3.  Taylor and Jones (1979), Cell 17: 771–779.
4.  Jones (2011), Nature Cell Biology 13: 2.
5.  Jones and Taylor (1980), Cell 20: 85–93.
6.  Santi et al. (1983), Cell 33: 9–10.
7.  Ghoshal et al. (2005), Molecular and Cellular Biology 25: 4727–4741.
8.  Kuo et al. (2007), Cancer Research 67: 8248–8254.
9.  For an excellent history of the development of SAHA, see Marks and
    Breslow (2007), Nature Biotechnology 25: 84–90.
10. Friend et al. (1971), Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA 68: 378–382.
11. Richon et al. (1996), Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA 93: 5705–5708.
12. Yoshida et al. (1990), Journal of Biological Chemistry 265:
    17174–17179.
13. Richon et al. (1998), Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA 95: 3003–3007.
14. Herman et al. (1994), Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA 91: 9700–9704.
15. Esteller et al. (2000), Journal of the National Cancer Institute 92:
    564–569.
16. Toyota et al. (1999), Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA 96: 8681–8686.
17. Lu et al. (2006), Oncogene 25: 230–9.
18. Gery et al. (2007), Clin Cancer Res. 13: 1399–404.
19. For a recent review of a disorder where gene therapy is proving
    broadly effective see Ferrua et al. (2010), Curr Opin Allergy Clin
    Immunol. 10: 551–6.
20. Kantarjian et al. (2006), Cancer 106: 1794–1803.
21. Silverman et al. (2002), J Clin Oncol. 20: 2429–2440.
22. Duvic et al. (2007), Blood 109: 31–39.
23. www.cancer.gov/clinicaltrials/search/results?protocolsearchid=8828355
24. www.lifesciencesworld.com/news/view/11080
25. http://www.masshightech.com/stories/2008/04/21/story1-Epigenetics-is-the-word-on-bio-investors-lips.html
26. Viré et al. (2006), Nature 439: 871–874.
27. Schlesinger et al. (2007), Nature Genetics 39: 232–236.
28. Shi et al. (2004), Cell 29: 119; 941–53.
29. Ooi et al. (2007), Nature 448: 714–717.
30. Bachmann et al. (2006), J Clin Oncology 24: 268–273.
31. Lim et al. (2010), Carcinogenesis 31: 512–20.
32. Kondo et al. (2008), Nature Genetics 40: 741–750.
33. Widschwendter et al. (2007), Nature Genetics 39: 157–158.
34. Taby and Issa (2010), CA Cancer J Clin. 60: 376–92.
35. Bernstein et al. (2006), Cell 125: 315–326.
36. Ohm et al. (2007), Nature Genetics 39: 237–242.
37. Fabbri et al. (2007), Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA 104: 15805–10.

Chapter 12

1.  For a recent review, see Heim et al. (2010), Dev Psychobiol. 52:
    671–90.
2.  Yehuda et al. (2001), Dev Psychopathol. 13: 733–53.
3.  Heim et al. (2000), JAMA 284: 592–7.
4.  Lee et al. (2005), Am J Psychiatry 162: 995–997.
5.  Carpenter et al. (2004), Neuropsychopharm. 29: 777–784.
6.  Weaver et al. (2004), Nature Neuroscience 7: 847–854.
7.  Murgatroyd et al. (2009), Nature Neuroscience 12: 1559–1565.
8.  Skene et al. (2010), Mol Cell 37: 457–68.
9.  McGowan et al. (2009), Nature Neuroscience 12: 342–248.
10. http://www.who.int/mental_health/management/depression/definition/en/
11. Reviewed in Uchida et al. (2011), Neuron 69: 359–372.
12. Uchida et al. (2011), Neuron 69: 359–372.
13. Elliott et al. (2010), Nature Neuroscience 13: 1351–1353.
14. Uchida et al. (2011), Neuron 69: 359–372.
15. For a useful review of animal models of depression, see Nestler and
    Hyman (2010), Nature Neuroscience 13: 1161–1169.
16. Uchida et al. (2011), Neuron 69: 359–372.
17. Weaver et al. (2004), Nature Neuroscience 7: 847–854.
18. See, for example, interviews in Buchen (2010), Nature 467: 146–148.
19. Mayer et al. (2000), Nature 403: 501–502.
20. Tahiliani et al. (2009), Science 324: 30–5.
21. Globisch et al. (2010), PLoS One 5: e15367.
22. For a useful review of DNA methylation and memory formation, see Day
    and Sweatt (2010), Nature Neuroscience 13: 1319–1329.
23. Korzus et al. (2004), Neuron 42: 961–972.
24. Alarcón et al. (2004), Neuron 42: 947–959.
25. MacDonald and Roskams (2008), Dev Dyn. 237: 2256–2267.
26. Guan et al. (2009), Nature 459: 55–60.
27. Fischer et al. (2007), Nature 447: 178–182.
28. Im et al. (2010), Nature Neuroscience 13: 1120–1127.
29. Deng et al. (2010), Nature Neuroscience 13: 1128–1136.
30. Garfield et al. (2011), Nature 469: 534–538.

Chapter 13

1.  http://www.isaps.org/uploads/news_pdf/Raw_data_Survey2009.pdf
2.  Aubert and Lansdorp (2008), Physiological Reviews 88: 557–579.
3.  For a review of this and other surveys on public attitudes to
    lifespan extension, see Partridge et al. (2010), EMBO Reports 11:
    735–737.
4.  Bjornsson et al. (2008), Journal of the American Medical Association
    299: 2877–2883.
5.  Gaudet et al. (2003), Science 300: 488–492.
6.  Eden et al. (2003), Science 300: 455.
7.  For a useful review of changes in epigenetic modifications during
    ageing, see Calvanese et al. (2009), Ageing Research Reviews 8:
    269–276.
8.  Kennedy et al. (1995), Cell 80: 485–496.
9.  Kaeberlein et al. (1999), Genes and Development 13: 2570–2580.
10. Dang et al. (2009), Nature 459: 802–807.
11. Tissenbaum and Guarente (2001), Nature 410: 227–230.
12. Rogina and Helfand (2004), Proceedings of the National Academy of
    Sciences USA 101: 15998–16003.
13. Michishita et al. (2008), Nature 452: 492–496.
14. Kawahara et al. (2009), Cell 136: 62–74.
15. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/277700
16. Michishita et al. (2008), Nature 452: 492–496.
17. McCay et al. (1935), Nutrition 5: 155–71.
18. Reviewed in Kaeberlein and Powers (2007), Ageing Research Reviews 6:
    128–140.
19. Partridge et al. (2010), EMBO Reports 11: 735–737.
20. Howitz et al. (2003), Nature 425: 191–196.
21. Wood et al. (2004), Nature 430: 686–689.
22. Baur et al. (2006), Nature 444: 337–342.
23. Howitz et al. (2003), Nature 425: 191–196.
24. Beher et al. (2009), Chem Biol Drug Des. 74: 619–24.
25. Pacholec et al. (2010), J Biol Chem. 285: 8340–51.
26. For a review, see Chaturvedi et al. (2010), Chem Soc Rev. 39:
    435–54.
27. http://www.fiercebiotech.com/story/weak-efficacy-renal-risks-force-gsk-dump-resveratrol-program/2010-12-01

Chapter 14

1.  McCay et al. (1935), Nutrition 5: 155–71.
2.  For a useful review of the differences, see Chittka and Chittka
    (2010), PLoS Biology 8: e1000532.
3.  For a useful summary of these processes, see Maleszka (2008),
    Epigenetics 3: 188–192.
4.  Honeybee Genome Sequencing Consortium (2006), Nature 443: 931–49.
5.  Wang et al. (2006), Science 314: 645–647.
6.  Kucharski et al. (2008), Science 319: 1827–1830.
7.  Lyko et al. (2010), PLos Biol. 8: e1000506.
8.  Spannhoff et al. (2011), EMBO Reports 12: 238–243.
9.  Lockett et al. (2010), NeuroReport 21: 812–816.
10. Hunt et al. (2010), Genome Biol Evol 2: 719–728.
11. Lyko et al. (2010), PLos Biol. 8: e1000506.
12. Bonasio et al. (2010), Science 329: 1068–1071
13. Izuta et al. (2009), Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 6: 489–94.

Chapter 15

1.  For a useful review, see Dennis and Peacock (2009), J Biol 8:
    article 57.
2.  For a useful summary of the epigenetic control of vernalisation, see
    Ahmad et al. (2010), Molecular Plant 4: 719–728.
3.  Pien et al. (2008), Plant Cell 20: 580–588.
4.  Sung and Amasino (2004), Nature 427: 159–164.
5.  De Lucia et al. (2008), Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA 105: 16831–16836.
6.  Heo and Sung (2011), Science 331: 76–79.
7.  Pant et al. (2008), Plant J 53: 731–738.
8.  Palauqui et al. (1997), EMBO J 16: 4738–4745
9.  See, for example, Schubert et al. (2006), EMBO J 25: 4638–4649.
10. Gehring et al. (2009), Science 324: 1447–1451.
11. Hsieh et al. (2009), Science 324: 1451–1454
12. Mosher et al. (2009), Nature 460: 283–286.
13. Slotkin et al. (2009), Cell 136: 461–472.
14. Garnier et al. (2008), Epigenetics 3: 14–20.
15. Reviewed in Zhang et al. (2010), J Genet and Genomics 37: 1–12.
16. Chan et al. (2005), Nature Reviews Genetics 6: 351–360.
17. Cokus et al. (2008), Nature 452: 215–219.

Chapter 16

1.  For a recent review, see Wapstra and Warner (2010), Sex Dev. 4:
    110–8.
2.  Miller et al. (2004), Fertil Steril. 81: 954–64.
3.  Watson, J. D. and Crick, F. H. C. (1953), Nature 171: 737–738.
4.  Cattanach and Isaacson (1967), Genetics 57: 231–246.
5.  For further information, see http://www.sienabiotech.com.
6.  Mack, G. S. (2010), Nat Biotechnol. 28: 1259–66.
7.  MRC Vitamin Study Research Group (1991), Lancet 338: 131–7.
8.  Waterland et al. (2006), Hum Mol Genet. 15: 705–16.
9.  Reviewed in Calvanese et al. (2009), Ageing Research Reviews 8:
    268–276.
10. Reviewed in Guilloteau et al. (2010), Res Rev. 23: 366–84.
11. Palsdottir et al. (2008), PLoS Genet. June 20, 4: e1000099.
12. Abstract from Palsdottir et al. (2010), Wellcome Trust Conference on
    Signalling to Chromatin Hinxton UK
13. See for example Okabe et al. (1995), Biol PharmBull. 18: 1665–70.
14. Nakahata et al. (2008), Cell 134: 329–40.
15. Katada et al. (2010), Nat Struct Mol Biol. 17: 1414–21.
16. Gregoretti et al. (2004), J Mol Biol. 338: 17–31.

  Glossary

 

  Autosomes The chromosomes which are not sex chromosomes. There are 22
  pairs of autosomes in humans.

  Blastocyst Very early mammalian embryo, consisting of about 100 cells.
  The blastocyst comprises a hollow ball of cells that will give rise to
  the placenta, surrounding a smaller, denser ball of cells that will
  give rise to the body of the embryo .

  Chromatin DNA in combination with its associated proteins, especially
  histone proteins.

  Concordance The degree to which two genetically identical individuals
  are identical phenotypically.

  CpG A cytosine nucleotide followed by a guanine nucleotide in DNA. CpG
  motifs can undergo methylation on the C.

  Discordance The degree to which two genetically identical individuals
  are non-identical phenotypically.

  DNA replication Copying DNA to create new DNA molecules which are
  identical to the original.

  DNMT DNA methyltransferase. An enzyme that can add methyl groups to
  cytosine bases in DNA.

  Epigenome All the epigenetic modifications on the DNA genome and its
  associated histone proteins.

  ES Cells Embryonic stem cells. Pluripotent cells experimentally
  derived from the Inner Cell Mass.

  Exon Region of a gene that codes for a section that is present in the
  final version of the mRNA copied from that gene. Most, but not all,
  exons encode amino acids in the final protein produced from a gene.

  Gamete An egg or a sperm.

  Genome All the DNA in the nucleus of a cell.

  Germline The cells that pass on genetic information from parent to
  child. These are the eggs and the sperm (and their precursors).

  HDAC Histone deacetylase. An enzyme that can remove acetyl groups from
  histone proteins.

  Histones Globular proteins that are closely associated with DNA, and
  which can be epigenetically modified.

  Imprinting Phenomenon in which expression of certain genes depends on
  whether they were inherited from the mother or the father.

  Inner Cell Mass (ICM) The pluripotent cells in the inside of the early
  blastocyst that will give rise to all the cells of the body.

  Intron Region of a gene that codes for a section that is removed from
  the final version of the mRNA copied from that gene.

  iPS Cells Induced pluripotent stem cells. Produced by reprogramming
  mature cells with specific genes that cause terminally differentiated
  cells to revert into pluripotent ones.

  kb Kilobase. 1,000 base pairs.

  miRNA Micro RNA. Small RNA molecules that are copied from DNA but that
  don’t code for proteins. miRNAs are a subset of ncRNAs

  mRNA Messenger RNA. Copied from DNA and codes for proteins.

  ncRNA Non-coding RNA. Copied from DNA and doesn’t code for proteins.

  MZ Twins Monozygotic/ identical twins, formed when an early embryo
  splits in two.

  Neurotransmitter A chemical produced by one brain cell that acts on
  another brain cell to alter its behaviour.

  Nucleosome Combination of eight specific histone molecules with DNA
  wrapped around them.

  Phenotype The observable characteristics or traits of an organism.

  Pluripotency The ability of a cell to give rise to most other cell
  types. Typically, pluripotent mammalian cells give rise to all cells
  of the body, but not the cells of the placenta.

  Priomordial germ cells Very specialised cells created in early
  development, which give rise ultimately to the gametes.

  Promoter Region in front of a gene that controls how a gene is
  switched on.

  Pronucleus The nucleus of a sperm or egg, following entry of a sperm
  into an egg, but before the two nuclei fuse.

  Retrotransposons Unusual segments of DNA that don’t code for protein
  and can move between different locations in the genome. Believed to
  have originated from viruses.

  RNA Single stranded copy of a specific region of DNA. The term RNA
  stands for ribonucleic acid. It includes various different classes of
  RNA molecules including miRNA, mRNA and ncRNA.

  Sex chromosomes The X and Y chromosomes that govern sex determination
  in mammals. Normally, females have two X chromosomes and males have
  one X and one Y chromosome.

  Somatic cells Cells of the body.

  Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer (SCNT) The transfer of the nucleus from
  a mature cell into another cell, usually an egg.

  Somatic mutations Mutations that happen in the cells of the body,
  rather than ones that have been inherited via sperm or eggs.

  Stochastic variation A random change or fluctuation.

  Totipotency The ability of a cell to give rise to all cells of the
  body and the placenta.

  Transcription Copying DNA to create RNA molecules.

  Transgenerational inheritance The phenomenon in which phenotypic
  changes in one generation are passed on to the next, without any
  alteration in the genetic code.

  Uniparental disomy A situation where both members of a pair of
  chromosomes have been inherited from one parent, rather than one from
  each parent. For example, maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 11
  would mean both copies of chromosome 11 had come from the mother.

  Vernalisation The process where plants need a period of cold before
  they will flower.

  Zygote The totipotent cell formed when an egg and a sperm fuse.
